The Project Gutenberg eBook of The awakening, by Henry Bordeaux

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The awakening

Author: Henry Bordeaux

Translator: Ruth Helen Davis

Release Date: April 2, 2023 [eBook #70440]

Language: English

Produced by: Laura Natal Rodrigues (Images generously made available by
             Hathi Trust Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AWAKENING ***


                           THE AWAKENING




                                BY

                          HENRY BORDEAUX

                  Author of "The Fear of Living"





                          TRANSLATED BY

                         RUTH HELEN DAVIS




                            NEW YORK
                       E-P-DUTTON & COMPANY
                           PUBLISHERS





                       Copyright, 1914
                               BY
                      P. DUTTON & COMPANY



                                TO
                      MY DEAR AUNT VIRGINIA
                  WITH THE AFFECTIONATE REGARD
                                OF
                         RUTH HELEN DAVIS




CONTENTS

PART I

CHAPTER

I   The First Act of Procedure

II  The First Judges

III The Plaintiff

IV  The Defendant

PART II

I   The Other Side of the World

II  The Watch

III Albert's Diary

IV  Anne de Sézery

V   Elizabeth's Awakening

PART III

I   The First Stage

II  Elizabeth's Day

III Madame Molay-Norrois

IV  The New Life

V   A Ghost

VI Madame Derize

PART IV

I   The Palms

II  Philippe Lagier's Mysterious Journey

III Elizabeth in Paris

IV  The Return

V   The Phantom

VI  The Chartreuse of Prémol

VII The Opened Eyes




THE AWAKENING


PART I


I

THE FIRST ACT OF PROCEDURE


A suit for divorce or separation is begun, as everyone knows, by a
petition to the presiding judge: the party seeking freedom or release
from the conjugal tie briefly states his grievances, and requests the
magistrate, according to law, to attempt a reconciliation, a useless
proceeding in most cases, before the final break. In the provinces, the
first step in the proceedings is generally heartily welcomed in the
solicitors' offices. The clerks hastily leave their desks to get a look
at the rough draft--which they will soon have to copy--with all the
eagerness of youth to enjoy a scandal, the participants in which are
known to them. It is a regular treat for them; but their unkindness is
quite devoid of malice.

Thus, the Derize case at Grenoble brought into close conference in M.
Tabourin's office, during the chief's absence, the four clerks--the
learned Vitrolle, Dauras, Lestaque and the errand-boy Malaunay. They
began the reading of a communication from the veteran barrister, M.
Salvage with the formality commensurate with the importance of the
persons concerned, and with a sense of the glory reflected upon the
office by such a truly Parisian affair.

"Another victim of man's selfishness!" cried Vitrolle with an air of
finality.

The head clerk was chivalrous, a feminist, and imbued with a local
patriotism stimulated by the scholarly learning of an archivist. Had he
not discovered from statistics--into what will statistics not
inquire?--that "the number of deceived husbands is less in Dauphiné than
anywhere else," this being an opinion which an old author named
Chateaumières de Grenaille had formulated as early as the 16th century,
stating that it was "almost a miracle to hear of a woman in
Grenoble having a love-affair to the damage or prejudice of her
reputation." Nothing less than this learned authority could have induced
him to side against M. Derize, whose almost universal reputation as an
historian would otherwise have had great weight with him.

"Pooh, let's wait for the answer," protested young Malaunay, who, at the
age of seventeen or eighteen, after having gone through many offices,
was profoundly skeptical in all matters of morals.

But his doubts were not shared by his three colleagues, for they had
seen the pretty, quiet Madame Derize in the street, in the public
garden, on the quays of the Isère, and they earnestly and unanimously
vouched for the innocence of their new client.

"I hope you're right, I'm sure," said the office boy indifferently. "All
the same I had anticipated this case."

He gave this retrospective prophecy with the air of one who knows life
not merely from legal document, but from every angle of personal
observation.

"What do you mean?" asked Dauras and Lestaque, who had but one thought in
common.

"Well, one day at the museum--"

"What were you doing at the museum?"

"Copying a deed, perhaps--one day at the museum, M. Derize was showing
his wife the pictures. I was behind them--they had stopped in front of
the portrait of an old man, all wrinkled, who, at first glance, looked
very ugly to me."

"Who was the artist?" asked Vitrolle, before risking an opinion.

"I don't know--it's all the same to me."

"You have no taste."

"He was saying, 'Look at that face; see how it sums up the whole of
peasant life with its daily struggles, its sorrows, its parsimony
indelibly written in the wrinkles, its dreams--and perhaps a little
alcohol too--in the glassy eye.' He spoke excitedly, and said a lot of
other things that I've forgotten. I profited by his lessons. But Madame
Derize did not stir any more than a post. She certainly is beautiful,
but I find her too impassive. Really, I thought the old man quite alive,
instead of just a portrait in a frame hanging on the wall."

"What then?"

"Listen. To the right of the old man there was a picture of a lady in a
low cut dress. A red dress with all kinds of dangles on the sleeves and
bodice. Mme. Derize took in the costume at a glance, you understand; she
said: 'Lace looks very well with velvet.' Her husband was furious and
did not say another word while they were in the gallery."

"And after that?" said Vitrolle.

"After that? Nothing. Divorce, that's all."

His hearers burst into insolent laughter which vexed Malaunay, for he
was proud of his keen insight and exceedingly sensitive. This discussion
of art bored the scribblers who had expected a more risqué story. The
entrance of the chief put an end to their conference.

Without being old, M. Tabourin appeared so, because he was untidy and
looked as if he were covered with the dust of his folios. He had often
envied the baldness of most of his colleagues, when hurriedly running a
comb through his overabundant hair, for it remained rumpled like poor
soil which closes up again after being plowed. He was absorbed in the
duties of his office and gave no thought to the fit of his clothing,
which hung loosely on his body and twisted itself into wrinkles with
every movement. Business had such a fascination for him that he never
confused it with the human tragedies hidden beneath it: he considered
his cases as distinct persons in themselves, living and important, each
one lodging in a folio, so that he did not need occupy himself with the
repetition of decisions and of the procedure in compromised or ruined
homes. Professionals are nearly all so constituted, and that is why
their professions do not wear them out.

"Anything new?" he asked the head clerk. Vitrolle handed him the draft.

"The Derize Petition."

"Ah! Ah!"

This news brought out in M. Tabourin's dull face lines of cupidity, as
the light shining in a badly aired room gathers together a group of
atoms and invites them to dance. He drew nearer to the window to
decipher Salvage's cramped writing. The clerks watched him curiously,
with the exception of Malaunay, who was waiting for a good opportunity
to leave. The lovely June sun was calling him to come out and walk.

M. Tabourin's law-office is situated in St. André's Square, on the
first floor, opposite the court house. It is reached through a dark,
dirty corridor at the end of which is an open staircase: for
entrance-halls, which are the pride of Paris and frequently of foreign
cities as well, are generally sacrificed in the provincial towns of
France, so that even large, commodious, roomy apartments with high
ceilings, have the most wretched approaches.

As Grenette Square was formerly the business center of Grenoble,--still
is in fact,--so St. André's Square was the real heart of the town,
since there the religious, the municipal and the judicial life met, and
even now are represented by their monuments. The past of Dauphiné
dwells there, but one has to search a while to find it, for in this
capital of long ago, the old is everywhere hidden beneath the new. As
you alight at the station, you see only newly-built districts, houses
scarcely finished, and wide avenues, whose perspective terminates in the
far-away mountains. An industrious and prosperous town, you conclude,
born yesterday in noble surroundings and lacking historic coloring. Even
the streets have been renamed; the old "Rue des Jésuites," where
Stendhal was born, is now called "Jean Jacques Rousseau." A few
fortified gates opened in the ramparts have been ruthlessly dismantled,
but those still standing interest the pedestrian, who, little by little,
by following the winding paths of L'Ile Verte, finds traces of the wall
of enclosure, perceives the bastions against the sides of Mont Rachois,
imagines from these evidences of defensive toil the battles of old, and
is prepared to discover by chance somewhere in the bright city one or
other of those expressions of the spirit of a race which has maintained
its integrity with a tenacity that has resisted all the labors of
architects and engineers. Saint André's Square should still be
satisfying, but it is only half so. There at the western end is the tall
tower of the town hall which was once the palace of the Constable de
Lesdiguières, and there above the low houses which crowd about it and
hide its door, is the church whose venerable octagonal stone steeple is
wrought with double windows in a pointed arch. But the court house where
the Parliament of Dauphiné sat, shows a façade half Gothic, half
Renaissance, the materials of which have been scratched away here,
replaced there, and still retain even in the sunlight that cold newness
which only the touch of time melts. As to the statue of Bayard,--who is
represented as dying against the trunk of a tree,--it only encumbers the
narrow square without adorning it.

M. Tabourin had never noticed many monuments from his window. From the
time of moving into these offices he had taken pleasure only in the
nearness of the court house--which he particularly appreciated when
troubled by rheumatism. The brief of a case requiring special knowledge;
seizure, dispossession, "the whole gamut," as he said enthusiastically,
and involving heavy charges, when handed to him in its light blue
envelope was much more attractive than the past of the province with all
its memories. So he read the lawyer's petition without sentimental
curiosity, and remarked only that Mme. Derize intended to apply for a
separation _de plano_, that is, without preliminary investigation, which
would reduce the fee.

"Have you had the corroborative evidence?" he inquired.

"No, sir."

"Was there something about a letter?"

"That is probably being kept back until after the usual attempt at
reconciliation."

"Good. You will have the papers drawn up, Vitrolle, at once."

He took it for granted that the existence of a case dates only from the
issue of its papers. Then he went into his private office and arranged
one by one on the table the documents which he thought he would need for
the hearing of the court that opened at nine o'clock. During this
mechanical work, his inner contentment made him smile. All Grenoble had
been watching this Derize case for two months, since Mme. Derize (née
Molay-Norrois), had left Paris and had come to live with her parents.
For the first few weeks there had been a pretense of ignorance of the
subject; then, some over-gossipy friends felt a desire to provide
explanations: M. Derize was traveling to authenticate the sources of
some historical work; he had been unable to take his wife and children
with him, but was coming back to spend his holidays at Uriage as usual.
Little by little another version was given out. Some well-informed
persons predicted a divorce. "Would it be tried in Grenoble or in
Paris?" the lawyers were asking one another. The question was now
settled for M. Tabourin: he was to represent the more sympathetic side
in a trial, from which he would derive small remuneration, no doubt, but
the widest publicity because of the personality of Albert Derize, the
well-known historian, and of the prominent position of the Molay-Norrois
family. Thoroughly pleased, he opened the door leading to his private
apartments to inform Mme. Tabourin, who was grateful for this fresh bit
of news which would supply her with conversation for an entire day. And
this act of consideration for his wife seemed to him definitely to
establish the case, even before the proceedings were officially begun.

On his return, he found M. Lagier waiting for him in the office.
Philippe Lagier, although still under forty, was considered, in civil
proceedings, to be one of the most capable lawyers in Grenoble. Short,
sickly, with a faded complexion, delicate features, his hair already
growing gray, indolent in appearance, nevertheless at the bar he was the
equal of the strongest. High-strung and tense, he was tireless in public,
never telling of his lonely hours of depression. His colleagues
recognized his capacity for work, the modern ideas by which he
simplified old methods, suppressed flowery phrases, gestures and
digressions, shortened, condensed and clarified the form of pleading
until it seemed like pronouncing final sentence; but people in general
disliked him for the impertinence of his conversation, which was
emphasized by a monocle without a cord, screwed into his eye. They
disliked him too for his exaggerated contempt for professional matters
and his almost fanatical fondness for the plastic arts, to which he
devoted all his spare time, and for the gratification of his interest in
which he went to the museums of Italy and Flanders as soon as vacation
began, to collect the pictures, drawings and engravings that filled his
room. And all this, to the great astonishment of the specialists, did
not lessen his clientèle. He was known to be the intimate friend and
college chum of Albert Derize, who would no doubt place his interests in
Lagier's hands.

M. Tabourin, bristling, with his heart in his mouth, rushed forward:

"Good morning, Chief."

He was willing to flatter those who could help him in his work. Philippe
Lagier in accordance with his method, went straight to the point:

"I have just met my colleague, Salvage. He has sent you the Derize
petition:--although the parties are really residents of Paris, we have
agreed to ask for the recognition of the Grenoble court."

"Thank you," said the lawyer, as if they had taken this step for his
especial benefit, rather than, as was the case, to avoid the publicity
of the newspapers.

Lagier screwed the monocle into his eye to mark the importance of this
reply. It was a joke which he would add to his court anecdotes.

"Will you show me the rough draft?"

"It is being copied."

"I have serious reasons for wishing to see it. It is not a matter of
inquisitiveness, since it will be placed in my client's hands
to-morrow--I have informed M. Salvage about it."

"Vitrolle, give me the petition."

A man of importance and of so much authority must be handled tactfully.
The head clerk got up and brought the paper to M. Lagier, whom M.
Tabourin had taken into his private room. The lawyer was immediately
absorbed in the document, which read as follows:--

"To the President of the First County Court of Grenoble: Mme. Albert
Derize, née Elizabeth Molay-Norrois, domiciled at No. 9 Rue Bara,
Paris, the wife of M. Albert Derize with whom she resides in law, but is
in reality living at the Quai de la République, Grenoble, at the home of
her parents, M. and Mme. Molay-Norrois, has the honor to inform you:

"That she contracted a marriage on the 25th day of May, 1897, with M.
Albert Derize, formerly an officer of the municipality of Grenoble;

"That two children were the issue of this marriage, Marie Louise, born
on the 10th of June, 1898; and Philippe, on the 18th of January, 1901;

"That on the 6th of last April, the plaintiff, previously authorized by
her husband to open in his absence all telegrams and telegraphed letters
addressed to him, was thus compelled to take notice of a letter of this
sort sent to M. Derize by Mlle. A. de S----; that this letter, as much
by the words themselves, as by allusions to occurrences and a previous
correspondence, contained the manifest proof of the existence of a
liaison between the two correspondents;

"That M. Derize, upon being asked to give explanations, immediately
confessed his guilty passion, and by his offensive attitude forced his
wife to leave their home with her children and to go to her parents'
home at Grenoble;

"That since that time, after a trip to Germany with his mistress, he has
established himself in Paris in her neighborhood and continues to
maintain his relations with her;

"That under these circumstances the plaintiff has determined to take
steps to procure a separation from her husband:--with these grounds the
plaintiff concludes, etc., etc."

The legal forms for the interview of reconciliation followed and the
date June, 1905, with the day left blank.


Philippe Lagier did not see his cases in the same light as his host, M.
Tabourin, who thought only of formulas and remuneration. Lagier,
prompted by intellectual curiosity rather than by sympathy, was
interested in knowing the underlying details; the human conflicts that
they represented interested him, without changing his skepticism, which
was the combined result of fundamental indifference, many dislikes, and
the innate revolt of a disillusioned mind, cognizant of its own value,
but unable to put it to its best use. He rose. Through the half-opened
door, he saw the attorney assigning work to his assistants, and at
intervals reassuring two embarrassed peasants, whom he was about to
dispossess. Seated uncomfortably on a bench in the office, they seemed
to be so impressed by his affable manners and his poor clothes that they
hesitated to give full vent to their complaints and lamentations.

What was the good of disturbing him in his ant-like activity? Lagier
went towards the window, resolved to await him patiently. At the
approach of a group of litigants, who had reached the court house before
the doors were opened, two pigeons who were pecking in the sunny square,
flew away and perched on the trefoil of the pointed arches ornamenting
the belfry of Saint André. The over-restored monument opposite him
reminded Lagier of Albert Derize's vehement invectives against
architects; and, reading between the lines of the technical, obsolete
expressions of the petition, he recalled the three actors of the drama
which was soon to reach its conclusion before the amused magistrates. By
a singular coincidence, all three had been factors of varying influence
in his life.

Albert Derize was a college friend whom Lagier had chosen with that
unerring instinct of youth, which, in later years, gives way to
self-consciousness and hesitation. How brilliant was his career at the
early age of thirty-nine! After graduating from the Charter School, he
had gone to the Arsenal for a short time as assistant librarian.
Faithful to his province while away, he had published a history of
Lesdiguières, king of the mountains, in which the hard and cunning
rogue of the 16th century stood out like the hero of a novel, and also a
History of the Assembly at Vizille in 1789, which set forth in brief the
spiritual and material conditions in Dauphiné on the eve of the
Revolution. From that time fortune smiled on him. Despite his youth, the
Academy awarded him the Grand Prix Gobert. A publisher, impressed by his
self-confidence and success placed him at the head of a publishing
enterprise in which he had long been stimulating interest in the best
literary circles:--a monthly collection of biographies of great men,
short, clear, eloquent and accurate and very cheap; by means of which he
hoped to rouse young men from their apathy and to incite them by example
to a more profitable use of their time. With that versatility of mind
which is attracted by every great realization of life, Derize reserved
for himself the treatment of some of the more pathetic and inspiring
life stories, such as Pascal, Lavoisier, Marceau and Beethoven. In spite
of this work, he continued to labor from year to year with tireless
activity, on his "History of the Workman in Modern Life," in six
volumes, a splendid treatise on the development of unions, of machinery,
of manual labor and of economic and moral conditions. He was also
writing a "History of the Peasant in the 19th Century" in which he gave
free rein to his love of the soil, of agricultural labor and of country
life, inherited from a line of husbandmen ancestors, and in which he
showed by the reconstruction of vanished communities, both French and
foreign, and by comparison with new social units, the inspiriting force
of inheritance and of family ties. This work was to consist of four
volumes: the second had just appeared. Le Play, Fustel de Coulanges or
Taine, would have welcomed with joy this disciple, who was already a
master, because of his positive method, his erudition, his regard for
facts, and Taine, the greatest artist of the three, would have rejoiced
in the warmth of his style and the coloring of his pictures.

In reconsidering his friend's successful career, Philippe Lagier, with
the usual outcome of such dreams, began to think of his own achievements
and concluded:

"He had luck. After all I am as able as he."

His friendship, although deep and of long standing, was not quite free
from envy. He had deplored his narrow horizon and limited environment
too often not to be envious of the freer, broader existence that Albert
Derize enjoyed. He was his friend's equal in intellectual penetration,
and was much quicker to perceive the ironical side of situations and
characters, and to accept them at once at their true valuation. Because
of the unexpected scope Derize gave to all subjects and observations,
the contagious love of life which he spread about him, the inner flame
which at all times flashed from his eyes, how indisputably did he
relegate Lagier to the second place! And when one expected his
enthusiasm to lead him into an error, an exaggeration or a false
statement, he would right himself again as a careening boat with its
sails too taut, by a skillful turn of the rudder, swings into its right
course. A well-balanced mind and a passionate heart, one had to
recognize him as a rare force with the power to enliven the hours by his
presence, as his books animated them for his readers.

Philippe Lagier was interrupted in his impartial comparison by the
entrance of M. Tabourin.

"I will be with you immediately, Chief. These people who were
dispossessed were trying to retain their land."

He was referring to the peasants in their blue blouses and he
disappeared again to argue with them.

Philippe remembered his unpleasant surprise when he had heard of the
engagement of Albert and Elizabeth Molay-Norrois. He himself, at that
time, was hesitating about asking for the hand of the young girl of
nineteen, whom he thought too young, too worldly, judging her by her
clothes; too conventionally pretty with her pastel complexion, her
wondering eyes and that well-rounded form giving promise of developing
into too stout a woman. He counted upon time to dispel his indecision,
and had then been suddenly obliged to quit the field--which is always
difficult. He had, however, quickly dismissed this sentimental dream,
and had even been able to propose a toast on the wedding day, when with
the usual commonplaces, he made a speech to the young couple who were
"made for each other." Was not that reality outdone? This young man,
already famous, whom the Molay-Norrois had been proud to welcome,
despite the inferiority of his family, took with him to Paris a wife who
was worthy of him and would help him in his easy ascent to success.

Why had not Lagier come first? Richer, of better family, a resident of
Grenoble, what advantages he had to offer! He was constantly invited to
the house. And Albert had come one fine day quite by chance. Fate willed
it that Albert should always outstrip him. The petition for separation
which carried his thoughts back, had revived his forgotten ill-will. He
was tempted to rejoice at this misfortune, evidence of which would be
filed on the following day. But then, less indulgent toward his own
faults, he soon began a self-analysis.

"Am I going to betray him instead of defending him? Now, just what has
happened? In the first days of their married life, I realized that
Albert was not perfectly happy. Young girls are all too silly then to
make men happy. In spite of our intimacy he never made the least
allusion to any unpleasantness, but I guessed it--without regret. Yes,
without regret: a man is not perfect. Then their horizon cleared.
Observing the somewhat impersonal but delicate protection with which he
surrounded his young wife, I gave no more thought to their happiness,
and consented to be god-father to their second child--"

Irritated by these memories he opened the door and witnessed the
departure of the two peasants, who were bowing to M. Tabourin, crushing
their hats in their hands and thanking him again and again. For what
were they thanking him? For having put them out of their homes? This
devil of a man, not content with dispossessing them, exacted their
gratitude for doing so!

"They quite understood," said the lawyer, as he came back.

"Understood what?"

"That I have only their interests at heart."

Philippe Lagier thought this was intended for a cynical pun, but in his
office M. Tabourin always spoke seriously.

"Evidently!" he replied. "Here is your petition."

"Thank you. The case will go through quickly. Are you going to defend
it?"

"Wait. In the first place the specifications of residence must be
modified. M. Salvage and I are willing to accept the recognition of the
Grenoble Court in order to avoid any comments in Paris, but to make this
change seem plausible, put M. Derize down as living at St. Martin
d'Uriage, where he owns an estate which comes under this jurisdiction."

"Certainly, certainly," acquiesced the lawyer, reaching out his hand for
the document.

"And then--"

But some new clients interrupted the conversation, and as they were of
importance, M. Tabourin, hesitating, assumed a distressed expression.
Philippe Lagier, generally so impatient, was sorry for him. He closed
the door between the two rooms in order to enjoy undisturbed the
tête-à-tête with the third person in the drama. Over the compromising
initials in the petition, he wrote the whole name: "Anne de Sézery."
And he brought before him in a vision the young girl with brown hair,
the shade of chestnuts that fall before the harvest, a face one could
never forget, partly because of the disillusioned expression about the
mouth in direct contrast to the bloom of her clear cheeks, and
especially attractive because of the long narrow eyes flashing golden
sparks, whose warm desires seemed to contradict the premature languor of
her bearing. Slender, well-formed and strong, she gave the impression of
having been born tired, as if she thought it useless to pursue too great
aims. She lived with her father in a family château at Saint Ismier, a
village built on the slope overlooking the wide valley of Grésivaudan.
Her independent manners, her self-possession on horseback, her
conversation which betrayed a wide and catholic taste in reading, and an
almost mystical enthusiasm for secular subjects, these with her fortune,
not big, but apparently comfortable, gave her a motley following of
young men--of whom he had been one. For a long time he had been
desperately in love with her: she singled him out for the intellectual
qualities which delighted in stripping the world of its false
poetry--and sometimes of its true poetry as well--and still he could not
believe himself the favored one. Who could dare to believe himself
favored? He had loved her in his own fashion, which implied reserve and
caution, but had it come to a question of marrying her, he would have
raised a thousand objections. But at that time such an obscure person
would not have contented her, and, later, would he still have cared?

Albert Derize, whom he sometimes took with him on his visits, had become
absorbed in the study of some ancient title-deeds at the château, where
he found documents for his reconstruction of old Dauphiné. When Albert
took part in the conversation, he treated the girl's audacities and
paradoxes with the candor and loyalty of a comrade to whom one does not
feel bound to show any particular consideration. "He was already
thinking of little Elizabeth Molay whom he had met in the street and did
not know," thought Philippe. "It was he who mentioned her to me and
called my attention to her."

On the death of her father, Anne de Sézery, entirely unprepared for it,
found herself heiress of a ruined estate. The old man with senile
cunning, had for a long time concealed the fact, presenting to the world
a bold front, like a crumbling castle, with riddled walls and undermined
foundations. The suitors gone, the château sold, the creditors almost
entirely paid, she disappeared. In her pride she had told no one of her
intention. It was rumored that she was earning her living in England by
giving lessons in music and literature in an aristocratic
boarding-school. Little by little she ceased to be mentioned. She had
never returned to her native country. Ten years had passed. Was it
really ten years? And if it were ten years, how could he recall so
distinctly that disquieting face, at once so sad and so passionate? She
must be thirty-two or thirty-three now. And here she was reëntering his
life with all the serenity of the impressions of youth, sure of her
power to enchant.

This strange phantom had chosen his best friend as a means to recall
herself to his memory. How had Albert Derize found her again? By what
sudden turn of things had he come at last to understand this strange
combination of ardor and despondency? She had made herself remembered by
the passion she inspired. Had not her golden eyes in those days demanded
absolute love, love given without thought of sorrow, or of fear of risk?
Among these green box-files, arranged methodically like the limited
sentiments of civilized lives, Philippe Lagier, disgusted with his fate,
longed for the inexorable happiness she offered.

He had the proof of this happiness with him. With a mechanical movement
he took from his pocketbook the two letters and the telegram which he
had received from his friend since the separation. They were two short
notes, expressing no regret; but then, for regret Albert was too proud.
In the first, Albert entrusted him with his defense, in case divorce
proceedings were instituted; in the second, he begged him to keep Anne
de Sézery's name out of the trial, and to offer in exchange a complete
submission to all Mme. Derize's demands as to the custody of the
children. By a strange contradiction he had subordinated all his family
ties to this new passion, and wished to keep quiet the name of the girl
whom he did not wish to compromise, because he had no intention of
marrying her: it seemed as if he had decided henceforth to live without
the pale of law and society. That very morning, informed of the
difficulties which would attend his proposition, he had wired that he
would arrive with the evening express, and gave his mother's address on
the Boulevard des Adieux.

Such were the three actors. To reconstruct the drama, it would perhaps
suffice to read the evidence alluded to in the petition. When M.
Tabourin reappeared, Philippe, whose imagination was over-stimulated,
demanded:

"What about the letter in question?"

"I have not received it. It will be sent to you at the proper time."

"Good. Now may I give you a message I have for you?"

"I am at your service."

"Do you want to add to the scandal?"

"What scandal?"

"There is a third person mixed up in this affair."

"Nobody knows her. I do not even know her name myself."

"You are wrong. To-morrow that name will be on everybody's lips."

"So much the worse."

"Could we not, as is often done, agree upon another reason for
separation? We will accept it in advance. We shall not try to defend."

"You know very well that the judge does not admit such an obvious
disguise of mutual consent, and besides M. Salvage would not be a party
to any deception."

"Suppose I saw Mme. Derize?"

"Her lawyer tells me she does not wish to concern herself about it on
any account."

"Nevertheless I shall see her before the trial begins. Wait until
to-morrow to draw up your petition. Do you agree?"

Maître Tabourin made a weak gesture of protest:

"You are unreasonable. The case must be begun."

"Well, well," replied Philippe, "it won't run away from you. But now it
is time for the opening of court. Come with me, I want to talk to you
about one or two other cases."

And they set out together for the court house.

As soon as they were gone, the clerks began to deliberate again:

"Did you notice M. Lagier's anxious face?" questioned Vitrolle.

The romantic Malaunay hazarded:

"He is in love with Mme. Derize and can't make up his mind to plead
against her."

The two others protested:

"What do you know about it?"

"One always loves the wife of one's best friend." The office boy's
psychology was pessimistic.

"For the time being he has set aside the petition," Vitrolle concluded.

"It will not come up again," said the little man. "What do you bet?"
cried Dauras and Lestaque in chorus.

And they made bets on the Derize separation, as if it were a horse race.
Malaunay alone bet the husband would win.

So the inevitable chorus, with its laughter, accompanied the tragedy of
three people, a tragedy which these men of law were about to record with
the aid of a set formula and with the usual professional indifference.




II

THE FIRST JUDGES


The Molay-Norrois lived on the Quai de la République on the first floor
of a spacious apartment, whose eight windows looked out on the Isère.
Because of the rapidity of the current and the continual variation of
volume, the water of this river, flowing from the glaciers of the great
Aiguille Rousse, sometimes shallow and sometimes overflowing, is not
clear, but is undoubtedly fresh and cold. Above the bridge is a narrow
section of the right bank, backed by the ramps of Mont Rachais and
dominated by the fortress and the Monastery of Sainte-Marie-d'En-Haut.
The mountains of Vercors on the left and the Saint-Eynard on the right
complete the outline of a fairly wide horizon. One feels surrounded by
plenty of space and splendid air.

This apartment formed a part of the old house that Lesdiguières
prepared for his mistress, Marie Vignon, who was the wife of a silk
merchant: the husband, not taking kindly to this luxury, was
assassinated, and his wife, who welcomed it gladly, was married somewhat
later and installed in the Constable's house. But as is the custom in
Grenoble, the past has left no trace, and one would take the old house
for new. This historical relic had attracted Albert Derize in former
times, and so led him to meet Elizabeth Molay when she was still a
child.

Philippe Lagier, who had called in the afternoon to fulfill his delicate
mission to Mme. Derize in accordance with his promise to the lawyer, met
M. Molay-Norrois coming downstairs.

"What a pleasant surprise! The visit of an enemy!" said the latter.

M. Molay-Norrois at sixty was by no means an old man. His scanty hair
and beard à la Henry IV framed his ruddy face in white. Eyes of faded
blue suggested a certain melancholy which belied his smile and the
natural sprightliness of his expression and movements. He was dressed
with care, a gray overcoat, gray high hat, patent leather shoes half
hidden by fawn-colored spats, and from military habit--he had been a
cavalry officer--he held himself very upright and rather stiff. He was
slender and aristocratic-looking, and easily maintained an air of youth,
of which he availed himself in the presence of women.

"I have not come as an enemy," said Philippe. "I want to arrange with
your daughter to avoid this unhappy trial. You could help us."

"My daughter has gone out. The ladies are both at Mme. Passerat's; it is
her day at home."

Philippe Lagier, who was standing on a lower step, looked up at the
speaker. The latter showed a gracious, pleasant face, as innocent as a
child's. Had not his well-known liaison with the beautiful Mme. Passerat
become respectable with time, and did he not know better than anyone
what is correct in society and what is not?

"Perhaps the ladies would receive me some other day," began the lawyer--

"But if you will come with me," answered M. Molay-Norrois, "we will go
together. It is only across the Isère."

"With pleasure--"

There was in fact only the Isère to cross. The Villa Passerat stands on
the opposite bank, almost at the entrance to the stone bridge. It
consists of a building with a wing at the right and a turret at the
left. This little turret, seemingly so useless and of doubtful
architecture, had nevertheless played its modest part as watch tower:
they said that one of its windows, usually closed, stood ostentatiously
open during the occasional absence of M. Passerat, who was president of
a local Academy of Art and Letters and director of several industrial
societies. From the Quai de la République there is a very good view of
the Quai de France. The house, smart and new, though in an old
neighborhood, has a certain picturesqueness, due to its situation, but
could have been greatly improved by being treated with more simplicity.
It is ensconced, so to speak, in the rock which shelters it from the
wind, and it is reached by a grated gate on the street level leading to
a passage connecting with the outer buildings and the garage. The walls
are covered with a wild vine. The terrace, overlooking the quay, is laid
out as a garden, and from the entire façade, but more particularly from
the upper stories (for some acacias planted at the edge of the river
partially obstruct the view), one sees the magnificent panorama of the
Dauphiné Alps, all the group of Belledonne and the Sept-Laux,
snow-covered even in summer and glistening under the rays of the sun. On
clear winter evenings when that snow, warmed by the glow of the sunset,
takes on the color of almond flowers, this view charms the eye with more
delicate shades than even Spring can offer.

At the bridge M. Molay-Norrois, stopping to open his sunshade, observed:

"Formerly when you married off your daughter, all responsibility ceased.
Nowadays the children are constantly bringing their troubles into court,
and parents have no rest."

"Yes," agreed Philippe, "nothing is permanent."

"Indissoluble marriage was considered the safeguard of the family. Even
if there were some obstacles, it was respected. But good breeding is out
of date. Democracy has destroyed it."

"Perhaps it is because we have less time to devote to it."

"That time was not wasted, young man."

Flattered by this designation, the lawyer was tempted to agree, but the
old beau went on:

"Discretion, tact, ingenuity in living are all lost qualities. People
cry from the housetops what ought to be kept quiet. You will see the
paper that has been drawn up by your colleague, the austere Salvage, an
old friend of my family. Ah, those old friends of ours, the lawyers,
barristers, doctors, what a nuisance they are, my dear fellow! You have
to consult them in the name of the venerable usages which they keep up,
and they take advantage of it to ruin you, to drag you into law-suits,
to crush you--"

"I saw the petition."

"Well, what do you think of it? The truth--they are all for the truth.
As if truth is necessary to civilization: as if a highly organized
society, eager for enjoyment, could get on without hypocrisy! And you
take the whole world into your confidence. Formerly silence was a rule
of good taste."

"Let us reconcile them."

"It is impossible. I went to Paris to see my son-in-law; he was off to
Germany with the young woman. My sons Oliver and Victor wished to
challenge him. It was foolish of them, but generous. I had great
difficulty in restraining them. Would you have believed it? A scholar,
an ambitious man to compromise his career and lose all chance of
election to the Academy! One does not wreck one's home for such follies.
He used to love Elizabeth: perhaps he still loves her. Who has not loved
two women at the same time? But there you are, he is proud. When he was
caught in an awkward situation, instead of denying, he defended himself.
I know him: he will not come back. They call that showing character,
whereas life is made up of concessions."

"And Mme. Derize?"

"The ladies are greatly wrought up. They excite each other: they talk
about it all the time. Their patience, which I have kept alive for two
months, is at an end."

"Then this is final?"

"I am afraid so."

They had reached the Passerat villa. Philippe did not care to go in.

"Could you not tell your daughter that I should like to see her? It is
four o'clock. I shall come at about six."

"No, no, come in;--you can make your arrangements with her."

He did the honors of the house, as if he were at home. Madame Tabourin
had not lost any time! There were seldom so many people at Madame
Passerat's in the month of June, for then the heat seems to concentrate
in the valleys, and people begin to leave town for their country places
near by,--shady Uriage, or stations farther on. M. Passerat, whose only
passion was archæology, presented to society the frightened manner of a
library rat, disturbed while gnawing old books: but on Thursday
afternoons, he had less difficulty in appearing sociable, as a matter of
gratitude to those guests who took only a glass of syrup or a cup of tea
and a small cake, while at the evening functions, being very niggardly
despite his wealth, he calculated the expense of the refreshments and
grumbled about it. Not only was he not master in his own house, but, on
the pretext that his ideas were old-fashioned, he was no longer
consulted about anything; whereas M. Molay-Norrois, with his taste for
traditions modified by an exact sense of modern requirements, enjoyed an
influence which had given rise to the story of the unfastened turret
window. Gossip about the two had been even more general since Mme.
Passerat, surrounded by her enemies had to struggle at the same time
against her years--forty-five in all--and a tendency to shrivel and grow
thin, which, if it looked attractive with high-necked gowns, was most
trying in evening dress. She was on a fattening diet, but missed the
benefit of it because of her physical activity and her irritability of
mind. She was a handsome brunette with a curved nose, a quick decisive
manner and a loud voice. She loved to bestow pleasure after she had
secured a goodly share for herself. Domineering and charitable, she
treated life with an assumed frankness, which in reality she lacked, and
her husband, naturally fussy, was carried away willy-nilly by these
hussar tactics which paid no regard to his indecision.

The two new-comers found the room full. People had gathered around Mme.
Derize, congratulating, kissing, flattering her, until she did not know
to whom to listen, swamped by the chorus of "dear creature," "poor
little thing"--"these monsters of men," to all of which she passively
submitted. Neither her mother, who had scarcely left her since her
trouble, nor she herself had any idea of their lawyer's breach of trust.
The two women had come to call unsuspectingly.

"Society always considers the absent one to be in the wrong," Mme.
Molay-Norrois had assured her daughter. "Preserve the dignity of your
position, but be strong in your own right. Mme. Passerat is very
influential and she is our friend."

Mme. Molay-Norrois, with charm, straightforwardness and a devotion to
her daughter so complete as to be an annoyance, was withal not in any
sense far-sighted. Quite well preserved for her fifty years, and very
modest in appearance, except for too much powder on her face, she
combined, as often happens, a great deal of physical energy with an
undeveloped personality. She could read a book twice within a few weeks
without recognizing it. Very docile and amenable to the influence of the
moment, she readily confused values, and so a social call seemed to her
as important as a decision affecting the future of her children. For the
time being, she was entirely taken up with Elizabeth's law-suit, which
she raised to the importance of a battle, implying a touching confidence
in her daughter's victory.

Somewhat astonished by the present social success, she could at least
assist her daughter's triumph, and being very deferential to public
opinion, she congratulated herself on having brought about this social
acclaim. There was still justice in the world to laud the innocent and
to brand the guilty. Transformed into a heroine, Mme. Derize blushed
like a young girl. But women soon grow accustomed to ceremonies: this
new importance was perhaps in keeping with divorce, just as it is
customary to hurry to the vestry after a marriage, and as one, with a
sorrowful air, shakes hands with the relatives upon leaving the church
after a funeral. She conformed to this unexpected situation as well as
she could, and society approved of her quietness. The "dear child" did
not complain, did not blame anyone. Her beauty spoke for her.

Rather tall, with a tendency to fullness of figure, which spoiled
somewhat the graceful lines of her shoulder, of her bosom and of her
hips, she was wearing a gown and a hat of dark violet, the fitness of
the color being favorably commented upon as quite the proper thing for a
woman, who, although not in mourning, has known care, sorrow and the
cruelty of fate. Her small head was crowned with beautiful, silky blonde
hair, naturally curly like a child's, but too tightly drawn back by the
comb; her eyes were black, softened by the shade of her hair and
contrasting with it, her nose well-shaped, somewhat thin and pointed,
her complexion like that of an English woman, her features clear-cut,
and with her appearance of good health, and passive virtue, she
expressed nothing more than a contented, stunned youthfulness--contented
with itself, and stunned by the unexpected complications of a life,
which without doubt, she had expected to pass through peacefully, as
over a flat road in a comfortable carriage. At twenty-seven, Mme. Derize
looked only twenty and always gave the impression of just beginning
life.

It would certainly require great kindness or a determining influence on
the part of Mme. Passerat to protect this young woman, who possessed all
the physical blessings which are the envy of age and which form such an
attraction to a certain type of men.

When they saw the pitiless monocle of Philippe Lagier, both Mme.
Molay-Norrois and Mme. Derize experienced the same feeling of
constraint, and quietly withdrew from the circle of their many voluble
admirers. He tried to talk to the younger woman alone and finally
succeeded, after countless attempts, just as she was leaving.

"An interview?" she replied to his request, in her high-pitched voice
which so soon became annoying and seemed unsuited to serious
conversation. "But you are not on our side."

"I have a message which I must give you."

"From whom?"

"From Albert."

"I no longer know him."

This was said in a hard peremptory tone.

"It concerns your children--their custody. Have you lost your confidence
in me?"

She could not mistrust his intentions. Either from curiosity or because
the past still had a greater hold upon her than even she herself
realized, she brusquely consented without further request on his part.

"Very well, in an hour you can find me at my mother's house, at my
home--"

And her exit, with her mother as a diligent chaperon on one side, and on
the other, her father, who had understood the necessity for giving her
his public support, was an apotheosis befitting people of distinction.

This departure relieved the strain. Society, lavish with its compliments
and flatteries, must occasionally forsake this state of exaggerated
enthusiasm which is rather wearing to all concerned. But it is not for
the purpose of regaining the truth. Society sees everything in a
distorted fashion and manages so to confuse issues, that after
completely justifying its victims to the world, it turns and rends them.

"Do they know her name?" inquired Mme. Bonnard-Basson timidly. She was a
wealthy parvenu, whose money had been made in cement, and who was
received in society for her wealth, her pleasant ways and her meekness.

"Whose name?"

"Why ... the corespondent's."

"Anne de Sézery": everybody knew it--above all things everybody wished
to appear to know it, for it is humiliating to receive information
rather than to give it. Somebody named her and everyone agreed with an
understanding air. How should they judge her? The title of nobility made
them hesitate for a second. Before anyone spoke, a mysterious
thought-current, pointing in a definite direction was established. One
or another of the women recalled the young girl, formerly proud and
independent, who had considered herself beyond all conventions. She had
not left a very sympathetic impression behind her. Penniless, reduced to
the point of accepting a position as a teacher--yes, as a
governess--almost a servant, there was no possible defense for her. She
had lost her social position. They made her out to be an adventuress.
Those who meet with great obstacles in life and must seek work and
recommendations from others easily pass for such. They accused her of
wild flirtations,--oh, of course, with the purpose of finding a husband.
For she was furious at being an old maid; at thirty-four or thirty-five
(they were generous with her) it becomes difficult to marry. This
addition to the number of her years, hurled insultingly into the
discussion by some unkind gossip, caught the attention of a large part
of the company. But no one denied it.

"Thirty-one," corrected Philippe Lagier, simply. "That is adolescence
nowadays."

He received several angry glances, and they continued with the story of
an English lord, an old rheumatic millionaire with whom she had
traveled, but the narrator confused places and dates at will, did not
cite her authorities, and depended on a vague suspicion. And during all
this gossip, Philippe saw even more distinctly than on the evening
before, the beautiful disillusioned face and the sad eyes in which
flashed golden lights.

They consulted him as to the future.

"Could she marry him?" inquired, in one breath, Mmes. de Vimelle and
Bonnard-Basson, who had become bosom friends since the busy husband of
the latter had provided the remunerative position of director for the
useless husband of the former.

"Who?"

"M. Albert Derize, of course."

"Madame Derize is merely seeking a separation," someone explained.

"Ah, yes; that is customary--an absurd custom," interjected a young
feminist--"One ought to be able to begin life again."

"Many times?"

"As often as necessary."

A former Court Counselor, M. Prémereux, a permanent fixture at Mme.
Passerat's receptions, hastened to display his learning:

"Nowadays a separation becomes a divorce after a certain lapse of time."

"Ah, you see," someone exclaimed, "of course she knows all about that."

The Magistrate resumed his explanation:

"Article 298, relating to the statutory grounds for divorce, forbade the
guilty party to marry the corespondent, but that has just been
repealed."

"She knew it," said one of the women with conviction.

Philippe Lagier, without moving a muscle, added:

"Surely. Nowadays before falling in love, we consult a lawyer."

M. Prémereux, somewhat subdued by his thirty or forty years on the
bench, envied him this insolence. The women, not appreciating the irony,
attached no importance to this remark, and by a sudden turn of
conversation, spoke of the case of Albert Derize. M. Lagier had just
been talking in a low tone to the pretty Mme. Derize: was that not
already a sort of infidelity? They hoped that he felt a secret passion
for her. They foresaw it with that divination which is the attribute of
certain hostesses, who are adepts in placing their guests at table, so
as to arouse sympathies and provoke emotions, and thus succeed in giving
an added brilliance to their receptions. So they spoke in favor of the
wife before beginning the chapter concerning the husband. They praised
her intelligence more than her beauty, and her resignation more than her
youth.

"Now," said Mme. de Vimelle at last, taking the lead in the
pursuit--"why, with so many fine qualities that we know of, should she
have married a husband of such inferior origin?"

"That's what I say!" agreed Mme. Bonnard-Basson, who was descended from
prosperous tradesmen--

Nevertheless they agreed upon some extenuating circumstances.

"He was well-known, a member of the Legion of Honor, almost famous." But
an old lady asserted:

"For a writer the Academy is the only thing that counts."

They might have objected on the score of his age, but this was a subject
which had already been too much discussed.

"These differences of position between husband and wife!" went on the
angular Mme. de Vimelle. "There is nothing more dreadful. That an
adventurer and an adventuress should meet and be mutually attracted.
Nothing is more natural!"

And to outdo her friend of one season's standing, Mme. Bonnard-Basson,
who was naturally servile and sought every opportunity to flatter her,
took courage because of her hyphenated name, to add:

"Say what you will; only the old-established families know how to avoid
scandals."

She was forgetting the rôle that the Sézery family had played in the
history of Dauphiné, notably in the religious wars in which they had
taken part with Lesdiguières. But logic is not a factor in social
gossip.

Philippe Lagier had borne all these attacks with difficulty. To be
silent was to approve of them, and how could he answer everyone at once?
The women's principal argument he well knew concerned the humble birth
of Albert Derize, but to him this seemed the most preposterous of all,
for one had but to enter the house of the elder Mme. Derize to be
surrounded at once by the atmosphere of order, work, honor and moral
strength that had formed his past--but to realize this one must be
worthy of appreciating distinction of mind and character.

"Have you read the second volume of the 'History of the Peasant?" he
asked, in order to reënter the conversation. "One might apply to the
author the epigram of Mme. de Staël concerning our compatriot Monnier,
whom she found 'passionately sensible.'"

"Passionately," echoed one of the women insinuatingly.

"It is glowing and accurate. It has had great success and has been
translated into every language, like his 'History of the Workman.'"

Mme. Passerat interrupted:

"We are not questioning his talent."

"The Duchess of Béard who is very clever, uses it as her prayer book.
M. and Mme. Derize used to dine with her."

"He knows how to plead," thought Counselor Prémereux.

"The Béards are one of the great families of France and one of the
oldest. But how do we distinguish the great families nowadays? Not
always by titles; that would be a great mistake. They are known by their
traditions of honor and of gentleness. And it is exactly that which one
meets while in the home of the Derizes."

This daring was answered by a chorus of protest:

"You are M. Derize's friend!"

"His lawyer!"

"You are defending him!"

"That is your profession!"

Mme. de Vimelle, her nose as sharp as a razor blade, had given vent to
this last answer.

"At your service," replied Philippe. "But who is there that does not need
to be defended?"

And he took advantage of the movement toward the refreshments to take
his leave. M. Prémereux rejoined him on the staircase.

"I fear you have made some enemies," suggested the prudent counselor.

The barrister, who had been amused by the fencing match smiled
complacently:

"That is preferable to women's indifference." To prolong the
conversation he added:

"I will go with you as far as the Place Grenette." And he immediately
resumed:

"Why this haste in judging? They praise one, crush another without
understanding even the underlying principles of debate."

"That all comes from Mme. Derize's call," explained M. Prémereux.
"Nothing more is necessary to focus their criticism."

They reached the City Park, the shade of which, after the sunny roads,
brought them a breath of cool air. It is a little park like those of
England, where the trees, young elms and plane trees, mingle their
branches above the damp green lawns. A black swan with a red beak was
swimming on a little pond to reach the tiny island where his little
house was built. Water could be heard trickling from a fountain. An
avenue of lime trees in flower shed their intoxicating scent like a fine
dust. At this warm hour of the day, the garden was a refuge of peace,
softness and sweet reveries.

The counselor took off his hat to enjoy this pleasant sensation, but
Philippe Lagier resisted these natural influences.

"No," said he, without removing his hat, "I will tell you what shocks
society. It is when one presumes to ignore it."

"You are right," agreed the old judge. But Philippe did not hear him.

"Just think: to hold as worthless the prejudices of public opinion and
the art of reconciling duty and pleasure. So the world detests every
emotion that is sincere. What can they think of Mme. Passerat who finds
a means of having two husbands--one for his money, and the other to be
in the style."

"For heaven's sake, be quiet. I dine with her every Saturday and her
cuisine is the very best in Grenoble."

"Or that stout Mme. Bonnard-Basson, who from sheer snobbishness is on
the lookout for a titled lover."

"That is the way commerce renders homage to aristocracy."

"Or that crabbed Mme. de Vimelle who knows it, and makes use of her
knowledge to further the good of her family."

"She is a good manager."

"That is, without taking into account all that we don't know."

With an indulgent, disillusioned air, the old man soothed his companion.

"You are irritable. The hardest thing in life is to accept one's fate.
Everyone envies the lot of everyone else, and seeks to ameliorate his
own by complicating it. This is a great source of error. What we need is
a little philosophy and a few concessions; to offset our curiosity and
greed by the cultivation of some of those harmless tastes which broaden
our horizon without harming other people; that is to say: art, reading,
travel, good food, conversation, even dissipation, or rather a little
prodigality, a daily task, children to bring up! That will satisfy the
most unreasonable or the most ambitious. As to passion, it is certainly
detestable. It moves about in our civilized land like a blind man in a
drawing-room full of knick-knacks, and it should be put out of the
house. Added to that, it does not bring happiness even to the simpletons
who hope to get it that way."

"It is not happiness they seek in passion."

"What then?"

"Intensity of living."

M. Prémereux looked at him as at a curiosity from a museum.

"You are young--"

"They told me that only to-day."

"Your eyes are not yet open."

"Mine?" said Philippe, surprised and piqued; he prided himself on never
being deceived.

"Yes, yours. In order to judge, one must not be concerned in the trial,
and you are constantly summoning yourself to appear when you make your
own estimates. But never mind, the greater part of mankind open their
eyes only once."

"Only once?"

"Yes--at death--and then they are quickly shut."




III

THE PLAINTIFF


An hour later, Philippe Lagier presented himself at Mme. Derize's house.
Would he see her alone or in the company of Mme. Molay-Norrois? He knew
it would be almost impossible to convince the latter by arguments
predicated upon experience, obstinate as she was, with an unchanging,
simple conviction, in an opinion which originated with the austere M.
Salvage,--one of those provincial magistrates who have charge of the
morals of the community. If she were present, the effect of his efforts
would be nil. If she were not, his very cordial relations with the young
couple who had often dined with him at Grenoble, and who had entertained
him in Paris, made him feel that before the case was opened, he could
take this unusual step which he was about to attempt, not as a
lawyer--that would have been out of the question--but as a friend. He
would make another effort to avert a break, to lay the foundations of
reconciliation. Since their quarrel he had been out of touch with the
people concerned. Most of his information had really come to him from
the petition to the President of the Court: that contained dates and
exact facts. But of what use have facts and dates ever been to explain
emotions, and how much more truthfully can a facial expression, a word
of rebellion, of hatred, or of sorrow, give a clew to these intimate
dramas!

As Philippe was gazing from the window at the swift, muddy Isère, he
was trying with the habit of mind of a man of business who prepares his
plans and forestalls obstacles, to imagine Mme. Derize's attitude. And
he realized that he did not know her at all. The proof of a developed
personality is to be able to find immediate answer to the questions
raised by circumstances. We easily divine frankness or deceit,
tranquillity or anger, nobility or quickness of decision, except in
those complex characters which are the result of too much reflection,
and such is seldom the case with young people. So, in their many years'
acquaintance, Albert's wife had told him nothing about herself, not
because of excessive reserve, but because he could draw no inference
from their conversations which were never deep nor remarkable for their
spontaneity, but were, on the contrary, light and frivolous, enlivened
by that charm and sprightly ease due to life in Paris. He had sought in
vain for a clew to her moral make-up which defied his analysis and on
pursuit disappeared as a cloud in the wind.

Mme. Derize came in. She was alone--but at once took shelter behind Mme.
Molay-Norrois.

"My mother is coming in. I suppose she may hear our interview."

"Certainly," said Philippe, decided to take immediate advantage of the
short tête-à-tête, which chance had given him.

There was no time to lose, and yet they began by exchanging
commonplaces, which generally precede every argument: preliminaries
which seem as indispensable as skirmishes before a battle. She quietly
told him of her own and her children's health, announced her coming
departure for Uriage, where she would spend the summer to avoid the heat
of Grenoble. He stared at her somewhat rudely and with evident surprise.
She was wearing the same appropriate dress of dark purple that he had
heard praised at Mme. Passerat's, of the beauty of which he could now
get a better idea. But it was the puzzle of her charming face that he
was ardently studying: it revealed no traces of life nor of the sorrow
of the past few months. As long as he could remember, he had always seen
it as it was now, with high color, pure and glossy as a flower, without
a shadow or a line. Even the contrast of her fair hair and her black
eyes did not impress him as being unusual, and her mysterious charm for
him was the result of expectation, not of the past.

Realizing that she was under observation, she blushed slightly. The
blood mounted easily to her cheeks. He explained:

"Your extreme youthfulness surprises me every time I meet you. They
surely must call you 'Mademoiselle' in the shops!"

This compliment amused her:

"It is true;" she said, "yet I have been married eight years and my
children are growing up."

Philippe Lagier did not add that at every meeting she gave him an almost
irritating impression, a complex of vexation, of persistent sympathy, of
disdain and of a desire to provoke her: then all these contradictory
feelings changed to an indulgence, a gallant instinct of protection
which he felt for his friend's pretty wife.

After these banal remarks, in accordance with his usual way, he began
brusquely:

"You have made up your mind?"

"To what?" she asked, although she had understood.

"To a separation from Albert."

She seemed to be thunderstruck.

"Oh! why not after all that has happened!"

The lawyer at once expressed his point of view:

"A man like him is not to be judged by one action, but by his entire
life."

She noticed that he did not speak of pardon, but of justice, and she
mechanically repeated in her surprise.

"His whole life?"

"Most assuredly. I knew him before you did. Did you ever know in what
straitened circumstances your mother-in-law was left after the death of
her husband? Did Albert ever tell you of her devotion, of the privations
which that splendid woman went through to bring him up, and of his
industrious youth, so full of effort and so productive at an age when
the rest of us are wasting our days? Why did not you go to seek the
advice of Mme. Derize?"

He became more animated than if he were at the bar. It was an indication
that he was not unconcerned about her. And if he were interested in her,
why this awkward intervention? Our feelings have a singular manner of
expression. She lowered her tone of voice and said quite naturally:

"I have my own parents. And then, I have never been concerned in his
family affairs."

She brought him back to the question. He looked at her, her flushed
face, quiet and peaceful, her beautiful hair, too neatly arranged, her
calm eyes, and the little narrow forehead shut like a forbidden door.
And from that moment, irritated by that peremptory tone, and by his
memories, he pleaded his friend's cause, not with his usual weapons;
irony, wit and logic, but with sharpness and bitterness, almost with the
eloquence which he detested:

"In marriage, he brought to you a name almost famous; it has since
become so as a result of his work and his talent which are equivalent to
a fortune. It is an unusual opportunity for a woman--for a rich young
woman, to enter so broad and varied a life, constantly changing, in
touch with all the great minds of the day, and with all the important
contemporary events. It is something to excite curiosity and interest
wherever one goes, merely to have to open one's eyes and ears to receive
the best teaching: that which comes to us from contact with powerful
minds--to be thus connected with all the general life of one's time. It
seems to me there is no fate more to be envied. Most of your friends, I
am sure, only vegetate in mediocrity."

"They have their husbands all to themselves."

That was quite a feminine answer. "Life in general," "the great
contemporary events," were words devoid of meaning to her,--even rather
ridiculous in comparison with happiness. Elizabeth had not married to
help her husband exert an influence, to play a part in his life, but
merely in order to find happiness. What did this lawyer mean to convey
with all his exaggerated conceptions? And now he was continuing:

"The husband that a wife has all to herself, Madame, is a poor creature.
A woman's life may be complete with love. Men must have other aims.
There is none higher than Albert's."

"Yes, he is following a fine career."

Philippe Lagier, in order to hear her explanation, hazarded: "He was
more in the public eye, more exposed than others. Perhaps your happiness
needed some supervision."

She bluntly rejected this obtrusive attack.

"I do not accept police regulation of my personal affairs."

He made a slight movement of discouragement:

"That is not the point," he said.

She reminded Albert's friend of the unfair neglect she had suffered: of
the position of her family--of her circle of friends, even of her
fortune. She had not come to her marriage empty-handed. She was right.
This was the consensus of opinion in Grenoble. Albert Derize, of lowly
origin and with no money, had made a very good match, so everyone said,
in marrying Mlle. Molay-Norrois. The Molay-Norrois have an excellent
name and live in great style. It was true she had received as a dowry
the sum of two hundred thousand francs, of which one quarter was still
unpaid because of her two spendthrift brothers--one an officer, and the
other an attaché of an embassy. The habits she had acquired at home
permitted no economy either in her dress, in her house, nor in the
number of her servants, so that her husband, with his thirty or forty
thousand francs' yearly income, could scarcely keep up appearances in
Paris. But it was known that the money for the upkeep of the house came
or would come from her: that was an established fact, impossible to
deny, and that no matter how many books he published, this would remain
unchanged.

Philippe, unconvinced, shook his head. Albert's fame became a career,
and his work an obligation. And he looked almost with irritation at this
obstinate forehead, half hidden by that childlike hair, at those eyes,
so soft and peaceful, reflecting an ineradicable conviction.

To convince him in her turn, she summed up as a formula a very simple
argument.

"I have fulfilled my duties and he has been unfaithful to his."

Thus stated, the argument was simplifying itself. But the lawyer would
not allow it to be so expressed:

"Listen, Madame, it is a friend and a very sincere friend who is
speaking to you. I have defended many divorces and separations: and I
have never known, never, you understand--that the faults were all on one
side."

He did not add that his experience had proved to him for a long time
that security, harmony and the union of a home depended more on the wife
than on the husband; she makes or unmakes the family as she does the
fortune.

"Faults? What are mine?" asked Mme. Derize, smiling. "I should like to
know what they are."

"I do not know yet. But I am sure that they exist."

Offended by this insistence, she defied him.

"Really? Tell me what they are."

He answered her in his own bantering way.

"Perhaps I shall tell you some day."

He was the first one who did not treat her as a victim, who did not pity
her as a brave little martyr, and although she felt this opposition to
be friendly, it hurt her. To conclude the conversation, she declared:

"All is over between us.... I do not ..."

She stopped short, puzzled by the confidence which came to her lips.
What was she going to add? To find out he repeated in an insinuating
tone:

"You do not ...?"

"I no longer love him."

"Then you never loved him."

"What do you mean?"

"To love when someone loves you, when one spares you every struggle,
every annoyance, smoothes your life for you like a wide road where
nothing stumbles across your way, that is a simple matter! How does one
prove one's love? To love when one is deserted, forgotten, left alone,
struggling with every difficulty, or even when one's heart is trampled
upon,--yes, that is indeed to love."

"That is to lower oneself. I have my pride, my dignity--everyone
understands it for oneself in a different way."

And convinced of her own right, she asked:

"Is this the mission with which my husband has entrusted you?"

Almost roughly, as if he took an unconscious delight in ill-treating
her, he answered:

"No, Madame. Albert gave me no mission of reconciliation."

"Ah!"

"I have another mission to fulfill," he added without noticing this
exclamation which might indicate vexation.

"You are taking a great deal upon yourself."

As if to accentuate these words, Mme. Molay-Norrois entered the
drawing-room. She still had her hat on and was carrying her parasol.
Hearing of M. Lagier's visit, she came in without delay to bring help to
her daughter, whom she still treated as a little girl, and all of whose
problems she willingly took upon herself. From that time on, the
interview was doubtful, but it had to be carried to a conclusion, once
it was begun. Philippe, about to give an explanation of his friend's
wishes, realized the audacity, almost the impropriety of broaching this
subject directly. However, he decided he would do so. After all he was
only an intermediary. Then the circumstances required this solution,
which was, after all, the most reasonable. He explained to the two women
that separation would necessarily raise the delicate question of the
custody of the children.

"Albert shall not take them from me," said Elizabeth resolutely.

"He will certainly not take them from you. But he wants to have them for
several months each year."

"Several months?"

"Yes. And look at the unfortunate position of those children, to be
shared, and to be dragged about in two directions."

"No, no, I shall not share them. He has forgotten us. Henceforth he can
leave us in peace."

She did not require her mother's help to defend her rights. Philippe
Lagier thought this the psychological moment for presenting the
proposition of his friend.

"Despite his sorrow, he will renounce these paternal rights; he will
submit to all your demands, but only on one condition."

"And that is?" asked the women.

"You know that a divorce or a legal separation can easily be obtained
without stating the actual reasons, but merely by presenting an
insulting letter prepared to fit the case, or to bring about a departure
from the conjugal home. It is sufficient that the two parties are
agreed, both desirous of avoiding a scandal, and not wishing to furnish
food for gossip."

"What condition?" repeated Elizabeth, who could not imagine.

He leisurely dilated upon the customary precautions.

"It is in a word, mutual consent, which is forbidden by law, but to
which jurisprudence closes its eyes. And besides, how can the truth be
disputed? In this way the procedure is curtailed and the public loses
interest in a case which has become commonplace."

"Well?" asked the young wife who thought only of her own particular
case.

"Well, Albert is willing to accept all the conditions that you think fit
to impose upon him,--provided that no name be mentioned at the trial."

"Ah," said Elizabeth simply, and her eyes filled with tears. Two seconds
later the tears were dried, and the charming face had regained its usual
composure, so that Philippe had his doubts about the genuineness of an
emotion of such short duration.

But Mme. Molay-Norrois let her indignation have full play.

"The miserable wretch! He is thinking of that creature's honor!"

And turning toward her daughter, she encouraged her in her refusal.

"You are not to have conditions imposed upon you, you are only to
dictate them. The judges, when they hear of your husband's behavior ...
will not fail to give over the children to you. How could they place
them, if only for a few days, in the care of a man who has remorselessly
abandoned them and at present thinks only of his mistress? A bad husband
makes a bad father."

"The judges do not willingly deprive a father of the right to take care
of his children."

"He himself has forfeited that right. Did he raise any objection when my
daughter went away? And does he not declare his willingness to give them
up forever--forever! if we will protect the honor of this compromised
woman? Isn't that monstrous?"

"You are misconstruing Albert's feelings, Madame. There are self-imposed
obligations which a gallant man cannot fail to meet without losing his
self-respect."

"He has only the obligations of his home," said Mme. Molay-Norrois.

Philippe, addressing Mme. Derize, read a brief excerpt from one of
Albert's two letters.

"And suppose it were from tender memory, from pious deference that he
refused to dispute with their mother about the care of the children?
Suppose he evidenced thereby hiss continued affection, his confidence?
As to the allowance which he means to give them, he begs you to fix the
amount."

As he concluded this sentence relating to the financial advantages, to
which she had never as yet given a thought, the young woman gave
expression to her revolt:

"It is not a question of that," she said decidedly.

Somewhat surprised at this disinterestedness, which was diametrically
opposed to all her preceding answers, Philippe insisted upon another
argument:

"Of what advantage would a scandal, at the hearing, be to you? What
benefit could you gain by it? Are you not satisfied that the separation
will be pronounced in your favor and that the arrangements are in your
hands? Think it over, if you care to, for several days, before making a
decision which may be so serious."

Elizabeth looked at her mother as if to beg for her advice. Her smooth
forehead was lined with a little vertical wrinkle between the eyebrows.
Her entire face, her body, was tense with an effort of abnormal will,
entirely out of keeping with the pretty childishness of the face and the
accustomed carelessness of her movements. She did not wait for Mme.
Molay-Norrois to give her advice.

"It is quite decided," she said. "I refuse. I will not lie. I will tell
the whole truth: so much the worse for those whom it strikes."

"Quite right!" agreed her mother, not without secret remorse, for she
paid no heed to the remonstrances of M. Molay-Norrois, who, since his
daughter's return, had tried to dissuade the two women from any public
scandal. But she was one of those good, loving honorable women, who are
controlled by the ardor of their feelings.

Philippe Lagier expected this reply. The turn of decision and frankness
in the young woman did not displease him, but on the contrary, seemed to
be a change worthy of attention. She rejected all compromise, not
because of revenge and hatred, but because she judged the results of the
separation to be less important than the separation itself. There is no
safer code of morals than the truth; but how difficult to follow,
and--still more--to accept! Being neither complex nor meditative,
Elizabeth judged it simpler to abide by it: at least she chose it of her
own accord, without submitting to any outside influence.

"Besides," added Mme. Molay-Norrois, "M. Salvage has promised us that
the separation will be granted very quickly without investigation."

"That will depend," objected the lawyer, "upon the document in your
hands of which I know nothing."

"The document?"

"Yes, the letter to which allusion is made."

Elizabeth blushed as if she had been discovered, and felt obliged to
give an explanation:

"It is a telegraphed letter. During Albert's absence, at his request, I
opened all telegrams to inform him of their contents, but never letters.
He had asked me to do this for him ever since we were first married. It
is true that for a time I had not done so. That day he was impatiently
waiting for some proofs which did not come. He had gone out. I was to
telephone to him if they came. I thought that the telegram referred to
them--it was chance. That was how I came to know--"

She wished to convey the impression that she did not watch over her
husband's correspondence and that all spying would have been unworthy of
her. By the expression of her face, even more than by her words, one
would know that she was incapable of such a rôle. As a result of this
attitude of loyalty, her youth assumed a more direct charm.

"Will you show me that letter?" asked Philippe, who, prompted by
curiosity or sympathy, was going somewhat beyond his mission.

"But ... why?"

"I shall read it sooner or later. If you will tell me what is in it, I
shall be the only one to pay any attention to its contents before the
case comes up. Otherwise, it will lie about in lawyers' offices. I have
come here as a peace-maker, not as a lawyer. I remember our friendly
relations. And if circumstances condemn Albert unreservedly, I shall
request him to select other counsel."

"No," replied Elizabeth, touched. "You are his friend; it is right that
you should defend him. You have already begun to do so. When you came in
I was preparing to send you this letter. The lawyers have twice
requested me to show it to them. Now I have no more secrets; my life is
exposed to the public--it is all the same to me. I will go and get the
letter for you."

But it was the life of another that she was exposing. During her
absence, Mme. Molay-Norrois confided to Philippe that she wished to take
her daughter away to Uriage as soon as possible, since the mere prospect
of the trial depressed her, and the children needed to be in the
country. When he asked for the little girl and for his godson, her
unfriendly expression changed, and her face was lit up by one of those
kind grand-motherly smiles, which, as a result of much association with
children, restored a little of her confident simplicity.

"Here, read it quickly," said Elizabeth, handing him an envelope which
her fingers scarcely held, as if they were in contact with a flaming
torch.

"He was asking for the children," explained her mother kindly--"Where
are they?"

"In my room. Will you go and get them, Mamma?"

Philippe understood that no one else was to be present while he was
reading the letter, and he was glad of this tête-à-tête with his
former sweetheart.

Anne de Sézery, Elizabeth Molay-Norrois, figures of his youth, which
still continued to affect him through the life of Albert Derize! What
had become of the young girl of Saint Ismier, so baffling in her strange
changes of mood? As she had come in the morning, so now again she came
to his memory--the narrow golden eyes, the mouth with its drooping
corners, which wore an expression of expectancy and of weariness. But on
this face time must have left its trace. He looked at the writing and
recognized it, although it was stiffer, firmer, with sudden flourishes
and unfinished letters. And without stopping, he read the eight pages of
foreign paper which crackled under his fingers like dead leaves under
the foot which crushes them.


                             "PARIS, this Friday.

"Was it yesterday evening that you left me, my friend, my lover? It
seems to me so long ago, and you see I am coming to you first. I am so
much in dread now of all the minutes which pass so quickly, adding to my
years, and will so soon carry away my youth with them. When I was a
young girl--very vain of having attention paid me--and you came to Saint
Ismier, I sometimes tried to be a little coquettish just to please you.
It is not natural to me, and I understand the art so little, that I did
not make a success of it. At that time you did not guess my affection,
did you? It outdistanced yours by ten years. From afar and when you knew
nothing of it, it was with you. Ah! if love could but give us the power
to do away with time! But when one is loved, does not that serve to make
one forget unpleasant days? Since I said good-by to my old Sézery home,
which was sold, to my lands, to my trees, I have hardly known any but
unpleasant days. Standing on the bridge of the boat which took me to
England, I leaned over to look at the water, and the water seemed to
carry away all my dreams. I felt as though I were casting my heart to
the depths. What pride was required to live my humble life! And how hard
I worked (I am afraid now that it may have worn me out and turned you
from me)--to acquire a proficiency in the subjects which gave me the
opportunity to meet you again. How I love to recall that meeting! It was
just a year ago. You had come to London for that History Congress. Do
you remember our visit to the Tower? I can still see the block where the
Queens Anne Boleyn and Catherine Howard were beheaded. You were
revivifying those poor dead creatures, and I too was coming out of my
grave: I can confess it to you to-day. A man who is able to reanimate to
so great a degree the past, stones and even hearts, must live very
intensely.

"However, a month later, when I settled in Paris to receive the little
legacy from my aunt which restored my independence, I made no effort to
see you again. I was too much in fear of your indifference and my own
recollections. Then Summer separated us, and I wished to free myself
from the emotion which was constantly deepening and which threatened to
absorb me. But you came back in the Autumn. It is a season so restless,
so transitory, that each day seems to be filled with importance. It is
then that one's soul is full of anguish, at the same time declining and
expectant. One feels as if dying slowly, with the hope of being reborn.
As for me, I have never been able to be happy in Autumn; now,
especially, when I am beginning to understand the inevitable frailty,
the precariousness of youth which is vanishing.

"How could I have refused when you offered to show me an unknown Paris,
the historic Paris where phantoms still abide? When I was quite little,
I loved the portraits of my ancestors at Sézery; and for the pleasure
of knowing fear, I imagined that they were coming back at night. Oh, our
wonderful walks along the quays, in the hot sunshine, or in those little
streets which you know, where you called up for me ghosts of the past!
And St. Germain and Malmaison, and Chantilly that we visited in late
Autumn, when the forest has lost its foliage, and one sees so far into
its depths and into one's heart as well. Each one of our walks meant
another bond to draw us together. No doubt they gave added zest to our
instincts for research, to our intellectual life. Often (do you
remember?) we investigated one by one those marvelous hypotheses which
give us our desire for eternity. But it was for love that we were both
eager. And I, I continue to tremble. Your life, you told me last night,
could no longer exist without mine. But mine belongs to you for as long
as you will. May it glide softly into yours without ever harming it!
Without taking it, let it be of service to you. If you knew! I have no
more confidence: it has never been very powerful in me, and these last
ten years have killed it. I no longer believe in the happiness I can
give, and I would offer my life for yours. Direct my weakness, my love:
I feel so old and so young at the same time, and I love you.

                             "ANNE."


A business man is always somewhat skeptical about the sentimentality of
love letters. From the facts which are an integral part of almost every
brief, he knows with what euphemisms or what lack of perspective they
are worded. But Philippe had been too often to the Château in former
days not to recognize the candor of the young girl in this tone of
passionate exaltation and anticipated discouragement. He only divined in
her a more intense melancholy, like a latent languor. Her eyes must be
less golden, her mouth more drooping, her body more slender. In a word,
she must have partially lost her physical charm, which explained her
unanswerable fear of the future, and Philippe was sufficiently cruel to
rejoice in all those pictures which made her less desirable.

Madame Derize reappeared first with her two children. The invisible
comparison was greatly to her advantage. Thus framed, and with all the
attraction of her youthfulness, he thought her singularly powerful.

"You have read it?" she asked when he had kissed Marie-Louise and his
godson, little Philippe.

"Yes, Madame, but according to this letter she was not his mistress."

She was dumbfounded at this interpretation.

"Do not trifle with me: it is unkind."

Guided by his professional skill, he had discovered an argument which he
explained, not without having protested against her intentions:

"Oh, Madame, I am trying--despite you, despite Albert--to find a way of
avoiding this separation. It seems to me that had you wished to do so,
you could easily have triumphed over your--your rival. This letter
speaks only of an intellectual attraction. The scenes to which she
alludes only pertain to impressions of historical places, and are the
expressions of a certain mental exaltation."

Without any definite purpose, Mme. Molay-Norrois returned. Some people
have this privilege. Elizabeth gently requested her to take the children
away. Marie Louise, who resembled her father, with dark eyes like his,
ever in a state of eager curiosity, her features rather pronounced, was
looking at Philippe and listening to him attentively, while her mother
feared the precocity of this little girl, who since their departure from
Paris, had often asked rather embarrassing questions. As to the little
boy, plump and fair, he was obstinately tugging at the tassel of a
cushion which he hastened to pull off, so as to carry something away
with him.

Once more alone with the lawyer, the young woman replaced the letter in
its envelope.

"Now that you have read it, the solicitor will have no further use for
it. Shall I refuse to show it again until the trial comes up?"

"That would be better."

So the elaborate plan arranged by the clerks in the office of M.
Tabourin was frustrated. Without the knowledge of their chief they had
demanded twice in an official capacity the letter mentioned in the
petition, merely for the purpose of convincing themselves.

Then Elizabeth made a self-accusation of being only an ordinary woman,
of not having "a soul at the same time declining and expectant, a soul
of Autumn" and of being unable to understand psychological subtleties.
Unaccustomed to irony, she did not hesitate to set it aside:

"Besides, Albert himself did not deny it."

"Ah, how did he defend himself?"

"He did not defend himself: he accused me."

"You?"

"Yes, he had that audacity. He complained of I do not know how many
imaginary miseries which he tried in vain to enumerate. And when I asked
him 'What was lacking' he answered: 'To you, nothing; to me,
everything.' Those were his absurd words. And when I threatened to go
away with my children he did not even try to keep me back. Do you
understand now that everything is over between us? To-day he is living
with that woman, whom you are asking me to spare. She is almost old,
almost ugly: let him keep her. As for me--I want to hear nothing more
about it. It is over forever, yes, forever. You must not speak of it
again."

She shed a few sincere tears, enough to show herself to be in the right,
but not enough to spoil her complexion. But this exact number was not
calculated. Her self-love suffered as much as her love. He guessed this
and looked with more interest at her little smooth, mysterious forehead,
shaded by her well-dressed hair; at her beautiful eyes and all the
lavish youth that even sorrow could not change. His consolation was
expressed in the force of his final effort at persuasion; and when he
had taken leave of Mme. Derize and Mme. Molay-Norrois, who had at once
returned to her daughter like a faithful bodyguard, he did not
compliment himself on the somewhat awkward manner in which he had
fulfilled his mission. He could only await his friend's arrival to tell
him of Elizabeth's attitude. Anne de Sézery was to be put upon the rack
and exposed to the public. Elizabeth Derize would justly obtain her
separation; that was already settled.

As he was going along, he met the little clerk Malaunay on the quay of
the Isère and did not notice him. But the latter, who knew the house
and willingly sauntered about, took advantage of this meeting to
congratulate himself on his farsightedness: he raised his head with a
triumphant air; inhaled the evening air which, at this hour, was growing
cooler, and said to himself:

"It is quite evident: he is deceiving his client. Wasn't I right to bet
on the husband?"




IV

THE DEFENDANT


For several minutes after opening it, Albert Derize's mother looked at
the telegram, which announced the arrival of her son with the evening
express. She was surprised and happy. Then her first thought was to go
into the kitchen, for she gladly kept all extra work from her servant
who was almost as old as she, and having had only the one situation, had
served her for forty years.

"Fanchette, we shall not dine until half-past eight."

She who responded to this very youthful, high-sounding name, turned
toward her mistress, a face lined with deep creases and drawn with
amazement.

"At half-past eight, Madame!"

In the monotony of life, regulated as in a cloister, a delay like this
was an event, almost a scandal; but when she heard that M. Albert was
the cause of it, her mouth seemed to spread from ear to ear in a kind of
smile, and beneath her two prominent eyebrows her little gray eyes
twinkled as if under too bright a light. Although he had grown in every
way, M. Albert still belonged to her, because she had held him when he
was born. And she even continued to think of him as quite little, to
overwhelm him with all kinds of little needless attentions, whenever he
came, and to remind him of certain former unpleasant circumstances--such
as burning the end of his back when he sat on a foot-warmer. Although
she seldom went out of her kitchen, yet she had certainly noticed that
Madame had been troubled for some time, and had she not heard from some
gossipy neighbors, things which terrified her and pertained to one of
those shameless women, at the mere sight of whom one must cross oneself?
She thought at once of feeding the prodigal son with meats and pastries,
and proposed having all the dishes which, from his earliest days, he had
honored with his preference and which she could no more forget than a
soldier his victories. This ardor had to be limited to a simple soup, a
stew, some asparagus and pancakes with apricot jam.

"We will give him my room," added Mme. Derize. "I shall bring out the
blankets and the sheets."

"And Madame?"

"I shall take the little room on the south side."

"The sun shines very brightly in there."

"Yes, but he will need rest after a day in the train."

And the two old women, equally devoted, made active preparations for
receiving, as well as they could, the one who filled their motherly
hearts. But while Fanchette, with her tongue out, was absorbed in
watching her stew pan, Mme. Derize, opening her cupboard and rearranging
her rooms, was somewhat uneasy. At first she had interpreted Albert's
telegram favorably: this departure from Paris (which, although she had
never been there, she feared as a bad town where ideas of truth and
error underwent a change),--this return, must be the prelude to a
reconciliation: everything contributed to her confusion. The thought of
having her son to herself, all to herself, also helped to make her
happy. He generally stopped with his wife and children at the
Molay-Norrois apartment, which was more comfortable and roomy. This
exception to an established rule, to which she submitted without any
recriminations, was like a slight return for her self-sacrifice. How she
would caress and pet him! Not too much, however: one must not make men
effeminate; and, besides, he deserved to be scolded. For the first time
since he was a child, he had caused her a real heartache. She did not
recognize, did not understand his conduct. Marriage, in her eyes, was an
indissoluble, sacred union, which only death could break asunder, which
even death itself had not broken for her, although it had pitilessly
shattered a happiness of too short duration. What would become of
children if each of the parents had the right to begin life anew? They
had not asked to be born, and was it not necessary, after bringing them
to light, to transmit to them that other light which is the tradition of
the family? Has anyone ever realized anything without a purposeful aim
and a definite acceptance? She had written all that when she heard of
Elizabeth's departure and the infidelity which was the cause of it. She
had even wanted to go away, but Albert told her of his proposed
departure for Paris. Five times, with her slow, yet still firm step,
very much to her credit, braving the recriminations and the cool welcome
of the Molay-Norrois, she had gone to her daughter-in-law to induce her
to be patient and to forgive, trying especially to win the interest of
the innocent little victims, Marie Louise and Philippe. But she had
succeeded neither in moving nor convincing Elizabeth, and had met with a
formal, obstinate decision. On the other hand, she knew the character of
her son Albert, imperious, even proud, as is frequently the case with
superior natures. She too, sanguine in her affection, her nobility of
soul and her straightforwardness, had often suffered from it. The
forbearance of a mother is not to be expected from others! Elizabeth, in
going away after his breach of faith, had only acted within her rights.
It remained with him to give up his passion, to link the broken ties.
But she knew that he would not yield readily. And upon further
reflection, the feeble hope which the telegram had raised, flew away as
do birds which by chance have flown into a room and are eager to find
their way into the open.

A little breeze was coming in through the open windows, after the day's
intense heat. In the month of June, the light lingers late, and it was
not yet evening, only that intermediate hour of twilight when the weary
sun is slowly preparing to sink below the horizon. Madame Derize noticed
a little regretfully this menace of a finality which was not immediate,
but quite in keeping with her meditations. It was the hour she chose to
visit the neighboring cemetery of Saint Roch. The dead can always wait.
She contented herself with putting a little water in a vase on the
bureau in his room, before a photograph, which, with time, had faded and
could never have been very clear. And she even spread the flowers so
that the picture was in evidence.

"There," she thought, "his father will speak to him. Ah, if only he
might have brought him up."

She lived in the eastern section of the town which is almost part of the
country. Parallel with the old ramparts runs the Boulevard des Adieux,
with its tall trees and its little hills covered with grass. The gate
which crosses it is called by the same melancholy name, and leads to the
beautiful "L'Ile Verte" that must be traversed in order to reach the
cemetery. All the funeral processions pass this way. The consciousness
of death is ever present. For this reason, it is a section not very
attractive to prospective tenants, despite the view of the foliage, the
green slopes on the left between the branches of birches and lime trees,
Mont-Rachais and Saint-Eynard, whose cliffs take on, under the setting
sun, a brilliant color, alternately pink and violet.

This little flat of six rooms on the second floor at the corner of the
Boulevard and the Rue Lesdiguières, had been occupied by Mme. Derize
only since her son's marriage. She had then believed that her task was
finished, and so retreated to the neighborhood of the tombs. Until then,
on Albert's account, she had lived in the newer neighborhood near
Saint-André Square: young men need scenes of activity and movement, and
not quiet streets and reminders of death. When she saw him in a new home
and realized that he was attracted to and even taken possession of by
the Molay-Norrois set, who were proud of his growing fame, she returned
quite naturally to the cemetery which contained her happiness and her
youth. There rested her parents, to whom she owed this strength of
resistance which results from a happy childhood, her husband whom she
had lost after only four years of married life and whose memory still
persisted after thirty-six years. It seemed to her as if she had not
formerly had time to mourn him sufficiently, and that she was now paying
a debt; as old age comes on, we have need of warmth and sunshine, and we
recall both from the best days we have spent. He had been cut off at the
height of his power by a crushing accidental illness, just as he was
completing the building of one of those factories operated by the "white
coal" which is making the fortune of Dauphiné to-day. Without a diploma
he proved himself to be a pioneer. Albert's was the third attempt at
prominence in the Derize family: the grandfather had already been
stricken down before he found success. Thus families often present
incomplete sketches of the descendant who will do them honor, or are
impeded in their normal development by adverse fate, and do not succeed
in flowering.

One knows what a critical period a new industry always goes through,
when it is first exploited. If the leader fails, it is soon discredited.
Rather than run a dangerous risk, Albert's mother, deprived of her
entire fortune, had preferred to liquidate. This liquidation left to her
child only an estate situated at Saint Martin d'Uriage, almost in the
mountains, consisting of a house, farm, woods and meadows, which was not
entirely unencumbered and the income of which was only a little more
than two thousand francs. Alone, she would have gone there: the nearness
of the church and the peace of the country were calling her. Albert was
only three years old. From that time he was her aim in life. She hoped
that he would realize the success lost by his father and his
grandfather. To make some money and to give him a better education, she
opened a kindergarten, and when he was older, asked for and obtained a
modest situation in the post office at Grenoble, much better suited to
her capacity for order, intelligence and good organization. In allowing
him to find himself, to realize himself by first divining his worth, she
gave him life a second time. He rewarded her by quick progress in his
career, by his talent and later by his affection, a rather sheltering
affection, somewhat changeable and very reserved in difficult periods,
but which could be at times so confiding, so delicate, so deep, that the
old woman, as she thought of it, felt her eyes fill with tears and her
heart grow heavy. As soon as he began to earn money, he made her give up
all work: Must he not be allowed to repay her? When he married, although
their property of Saint-Martin, inherited from his father, and, besides,
entirely freed by himself of all debt, was inscribed in his
marriage-contract and even enabled him to treat on even terms with the
Molay-Norrois, yet he still continued to pay her the income, to which he
added a moderate allowance, for he did not intend that anyone, not even
his wife, should realize that keen struggle with poverty which he and
his mother had known, in order that no such imputation should be
associated with the memory of his dead father.

Nothing binds strong natures like trials borne in common. Even the
sharing of physical fatigue creates a feeling of comradeship and a
community of interest. During these years of struggle, an exceptional
intimacy had united Mme. Derize and her son. She had gone on with her
studies in order to keep abreast with him. With what understanding and
respect he had helped her when seeking her advice! And how she quieted
his ambitious desires, taught him this virtue so difficult to acquire,
especially by strong natures, and yet so indispensable, that no ardor,
no rapidity of work can make supply: patience! As if she thought him her
superior, she tried to turn him from scattering his forces, from
splitting up his energies, from destroying himself by newspaper work,
lecturing, and all those small accomplishments which a first success
seems to require, and the habitual acceptance of which becomes the more
dangerous because it satisfies a need for activity while permitting
pleasant limitations. Instinctively and without knowing how to explain
it--did she not smile in telling him what a superstitious respect she
had for big books--she understood that concentration on a single object,
strengthened by the habit of continuity, is the only way to give
expression to lasting work. Thus she encouraged him to great efforts,
and was doubtless of assistance in the planning of his "History of the
Workman in Modern Society," so useful to-day, and of that "History of
the Peasant in the Nineteenth Century," which was to be a résumé of
rustic life, and to show its everlasting nobility.

However, she could never be induced to follow him to Paris, either
because she feared to find herself out of her element, far from her
accustomed sphere, or that, and rightly so, she did not wish to take a
place which would soon be filled by another woman. From afar, she kept
in touch with him by a regular correspondence, and the holidays found
them together in their country house at Saint-Martin. Albert's marriage
brought about great changes in these lives, with so much in common. She
expected it, but she suffered as a result of it: nobody had her
confidence. She was even spared the trouble of withholding her
influence, as she had for a long time promised herself to do. Very much
in love with the hesitating Elizabeth, whose parents kept him waiting
for their consent, as if they wished thereby to accentuate the value of
their favor, Albert, with the impetuosity and forgetfulness of youth,
turned entirely to his love. She thought she had lost him forever. The
new family of which he became a member, more brilliant, more desirable
than his own, set in a more striking frame, flattered him and turned his
head. He was not born satiated like those blasé young men, who cannot
be diverted or amused; he keenly appreciated the pleasures of luxury and
society. It is often true of authors and artists whose talent demands
observation and contact with life, that they are attracted by worldly
things. The Molay-Norrois had a very large circle and entertained
extensively. As Albert observed his young wife, he saw an unknown light
shed upon his own life. It was during that time that his mother moved to
the Boulevard des Adieux, and as a traveler who descends in the evening
from the still lighted mountain to the plain, so she began to come again
into close touch with the past, which had been concealed by the shadow
of death. Later on she noticed regretfully, sadly, that her
daughter-in-law had not replaced her in the effective rôle of adviser,
which requires attention and daily effort. She feared that as a result
of Elizabeth's one-sided character, Albert would be ruined by the
failure which she believed she had detected. But the situation adjusted
itself and grew peaceful, as do those lakes, threatened by a storm and
then spared. He added to his lesser writings, doubled his income,
readily assumed new financial obligations and sought solitude, only to
write his great work, which advanced, but with less rapidity, acuteness,
enthusiasm and intellectual force. Elizabeth took charge of the health
of her two children, paid visits, dressed well, retained her beautiful,
placid face. And beneath this show of happiness was hidden an intimate
drama, which had suddenly revealed itself, and his mother reproached
herself for being unable to foresee it, when it would have been possible
to avert the danger....

So Mme. Derize awaited and feared the arrival of her son. She would
certainly greet him affectionately,--in her loneliness was this not a
great occasion?--but she would not hide from him her disapproval.
Moreover, the remembrance of her grandchildren made her determined to
speak her mind. With the aid of all her motherly authority and even with
all her former sacrifices, to which, as a rule, she seldom gave thought,
she would protest against this separation, which could not be final. As
she was working herself up to her duty, the poor woman saw the day fade
and the shadows rise, felt herself to be more and more possessed by
sorrow and fear, and found herself aging as the hour of his return drew
near.

The room was ready, the dinner done to a turn, Fanchette was even
beginning to grumble about the delay of the train, when someone knocked
at the door.

"It is he," said the servant, hobbling to the entrance.

At the end of the corridor, her black dress scarcely distinguishable in
the growing darkness, the mother was holding her breath, more affected
than if she were seeing her child recover from a serious illness. All at
once a "Good day, Fanchette," sincere and clear as usual, reassured her.
The dear boy could not have changed very much.

"Albert, it is you?"

"Mamma."

He called her "Mamma," instead of "Mother" when he was particularly
anxious to give expression to his affection, to return to her a power of
protection, as though he were still a little boy. With the first word he
warmed her heart. After coming up the lighted staircase, he could not
see well in the darkness. She came toward him and he embraced her. Then
he led her into the little drawing-room where there was a light, and he
even removed the lamp-shade to see her more clearly. At each visit, he
eagerly made this inspection, and with his penetrating glance which
dwelt upon objects, he could judge whether health and age had dealt
kindly with her, so far away from him. She took advantage of this to
study his expression.

Physically they bore little resemblance to each other: he tall and
well-built, with fine features, somewhat pronounced, a broad forehead,
heightened by growing baldness, brown eyes, little and sunken, in which
inspiration was concentrated, and that ease of movement which
contributes so much supple attraction to a man still young; she thin,
pale, washed out, faded, also having tremendous personality in her
eyes--eyes of light blue, whose deep expression was both clear and
candid, as the indication of a forceful spontaneous nobility of soul,
with a calm, sure judgment.

As they were trying to get in touch with each other by means of a few
insignificant words, Fanchette appeared with a beseeching, tragic face,
which they could not fail to understand: they had to go into the
dining-room without further delay. That might have helped toward better
understanding and agreement, and yet after a few sentences, they became
silent, and felt very far apart. They were both thinking of that which
they did not say. After the soup, as the old servant went out to bring
on the next course, Mme. Derize, astonished at the tranquillity which
replaced her agitation, came at once to the issue:

"You are about to be reconciled to your wife?"

He raised his head which he had bent over the tablecloth, and in his
most authoritative and cutting manner, answered:

"No."

She was always uneasy before undertaking a step, but once undertaken,
all her fear vanished. The brutal refusal of her son did not stop her.

"Listen, Albert," she went on, "a man may become a victim of temptation,
he may make mistakes. I know that. Without God's help we are all weak,
and you have quite forgotten that. But when one has a home, children,
one belongs to them. Nothing in the world has the power to free you."

She was instantly able to read on the hardened features of her son the
effect of her exhortation. He wore his most distant and forbidding
expression, as though high walls were surrounding him. Protected and
powerful he explained with perfect freedom of mind:

"I did not wish to discuss this subject with you, Mother. What is the
good? But you are wrong to condemn me. A hearth, the name explains
itself--it lives, it revives, it illumines. At mine, I breathed a poison
which little by little enervated me. I gave Elizabeth the life which
suited her. She lacked nothing. And I, I was choked. I did not want our
separation. It is she who unjustly desired it. In reality, we had been
separated for years and through her own fault."

"Have you not been impatient with her? And if she had some slight
faults, how can you compare them to your wrong-doing?"

"I recognize no wrong-doing."

"Ah!"

"You, you have been happy."

She answered sweetly:

"I have outlived my happiness by thirty-six years."

"That is true, but death strikes only one blow. It may leave a
strengthening memory. It is less depressing than that slow, continued
descent to mediocrity, to miserable monotony. There were, as it were,
water-tight compartments between us."

"No, a man of your type is always somewhat alone. What are these
differences of feeling compared to real sorrows: illness, poverty, so
many actual griefs which are allotted by destiny. One must know how to
accept one's life."

"I am not one of the resigned," said he.

"To accept does not mean to be resigned."

He made a slow movement as if to cut the conversation short:

"Do not let us discuss it any further--you cannot understand me."

"It is you who will understand, but too late."

During this discussion Fanchette, who had been coming and going, was
constantly on the verge of spilling the food or breaking a plate, for
she was so fearful that her master and mistress were not in accord.
Nobody paid any attention to her cooking. It was not to be wondered at
in Madame; one could give her boiled beef and potatoes every day and she
would never notice it, but Monsieur, who, as a little boy, was so fond
of his food and had such a good appetite, Monsieur who was able to
appreciate a stew! It was true then that over there in Paris they had
turned his head and exhausted his brain.

At dessert, Albert was the first to break the long silence which had
succeeded his mother's last words, by inquiring:

"Has Elizabeth come to see you?"

"Only once."

"And you?"

"I went there five times."

As if to excuse herself for not having more frequently renewed her
attempts at reconciliation, she added:

"I feel so uncomfortable in their house."

He could have embraced her for this word which had come so spontaneously
from the poor woman's lips:

"So do I, Mother.... I have always felt uncomfortable ... in my own
house."

She regretted her remark and again they were silent under the indignant
gaze of Fanchette, who went back to the pantry, raising her only
available arm: he had swallowed his pancakes as if they were medicine,
without showing the slightest pleasure!

As they were drinking their coffee, the last hope of the unhappy cook
who served it boiling, as he liked it, Albert finally decided to say
what his mother had been hoping to hear since his arrival, and the delay
of which had wounded her to the heart:

"And the children?"

"They are well," she said, her eyes filling with tears.

"Do you see them?"

"Seldom. Sometimes I go to the park to meet them, but they are not
always there."

"You, you _may_ see them?"

This was said with a deep melancholy, but as the declaration of an
inevitable fact. She rose from her chair, came over to him and placed
her two hands on his shoulders.

"Albert, my Albert, you are not going to desert them?"

"We cannot push them from us," he murmured in a low voice, growing
tense. "That would be worse."

But he added in spite of himself:

"Do you think that it is not painful for me?"

She knew his grief and bent farther toward him. Then he took her in his
arms.

"Mother ... one may make mistakes in love, may love many times, but one
has only one mother. I dare not take theirs from them."

"Marie Louise, Philippe ..." said Mme. Derize simply, relying on the
power of those two names.

In his turn, he got up to free himself from the motherly embrace.

"Ah, do not take away my strength. I need it, I assure you."

"You would need less to come back to us."

She insisted, she put so much warmth into her voice, she held out her
arms, as if to grasp hold of the victory. Fanchette who had come to take
away her tray, stood at the threshold, not knowing whether to enter the
room or to go back, and she waited in suspense at these effusions. He
knew very well that any argument was quite useless, and he had but
timidly to express one short sentence, in order to indicate his mother's
failure:

"You do not know _her_. I love her."

Her name had not yet been mentioned. No doubt she would never be
discussed, for the mere reminder of her existence separated them. Mme.
Derize said no more: what could she answer? In naming the children she
had hoped to overcome every obstacle, and the unknown obstacle persisted
with all its force.

"Your luggage?" she asked a little later, to break the awkward silence
which was oppressing them.

Material details often serve to adjust a situation. She explained:

"Your room is there. You are to have mine."

"I am leaving immediately."

"So soon?"

But this protest did not express the joy she had felt in the mere
prospect of keeping him, in little by little finding him changed. It was
an unselfish complaint, which was based on concern for him:

"You will tire yourself."

Fanchette, who had finished clearing away the table and brushing off the
crumbs, seconded this reflection like a distressing echo. Albert did not
stir. He discontentedly withdrew into himself.

"When will you come back?" continued his mother, ready to content
herself with the shortest space of time. "This summer?"

"It will be impossible."

Was he then planning to leave everyone, his wife, his children, his
mother, his country? She was tempted to murmur, "Why did you come at
all?" His visit became more menacing than his absence. At that moment
someone rang the door bell. It was unusual, at that hour.

"Shall I open the door?" asked the old servant.

"It is Philippe Lagier," said Albert. "I asked him to come here this
evening. I am leaving on the ten-forty express."

Mme. Derize preceded her son into her drawing-room, to receive the
lawyer. Philippe, who had the greatest respect for her, bowed and kissed
her hand, which always surprised the poor woman. She understood that
Albert had made the journey to Grenoble for this interview and that he
would go away without seeing his children. The game was certainly lost,
and since her presence was futile, she left the two men alone. The
lawyer was sorry for her and retained her for a second with these words
of regret:

"I tried to reconcile them, Madame. I assure you."

The despair which he understood, and the confidence of his friend
dispelled the unhappiness, which old memories and Elizabeth's beauty had
recalled to his mind.

"Well?" asked Albert impatiently, as soon as they were alone.

"Well, she refuses."

He briefly summed up his day, repeating almost verbatim the words of the
petition to the President of the Court, and when he came to the account
of his visit to the Molay-Norrois, he tried to explain the motive which
was actuating Elizabeth, who was suffering from the injustice of fate,
and intended to base her case on the truth.

Albert, who until then, had listened in silence, jumped up at these last
words:

"The truth? Does she want the truth? Very well, I will tell it too. We
shall bring to light our home life."

Philippe was amazed at this sudden anger:

"With what have you to reproach her?"

"I? Nothing and everything. Does one encounter in life only serious
events, capable of exact limitation and definition? The greatest
misfortunes are not the hardest to bear. Listen, in my loneliness--I am
speaking of my home,--I have noted down from day to day my impressions
of those last years. It happens that I have brought those books with me.
Here they are; I shall leave them with you. You will find some causes
there. I shall complete them. You will tell everything to the Court,
since she wishes the truth. And I am going to contend for our children."

"I have just seen them," said the lawyer, as he took the books. "They
are quite well."

With a decided movement, Albert stopped his friend as if to tell him
that this subject belonged only to him:

"I know."

Philippe Lagier, who was going to plead their cause, realized the
inefficacy of any interference. The restless forehead, the hard look in
the eyes, the distressed and absorbed expression of the face, showed
traces of that passion about which Albert was silent. And this refusal
to speak of it implied a rare force of concentration on the same object.
Every confidence is a diminution: it abstracts a spark of that divine
fire with which the soul wishes to be filled. Anne de Sézery invisible,
was there, in that room, present and dominant.

"It is definite? You will not be reconciled with Elizabeth?"

"Never!"

Elizabeth had given expression to the same final decree. There was
nothing further to be done but to let the law take its course.

"And I am going to ask for a divorce," said Albert. "And since they wish
to compromise her, I shall marry her."

He stopped short without mentioning her name. In his books he had often
called attention to the importance of family ties, and, like his master
Auguste Comte, to the value of indissoluble marriage: what authority
would he have henceforth to defend such historical conclusions? He
continued:

"There remains the question of financial arrangements. My wife will
naturally undertake the administration of her own fortune. I have
already asked our lawyer to make it over to her, and I shall give my
children one thousand francs a month until the courts restore them to
me--for at least a part of each year."

"If you remarry, the courts will not give them back to you."

Without answering, Albert went to call his mother, who was seated in the
adjoining room, quite motionless and discouraged, looking at all the
useless preparations of welcome: the only pair of fine sheets, carefully
kept since the days of prosperity, the flowers in the vase and the
photograph. She rose and followed him obediently like a woman condemned.

"It is time," he said. "Philippe is going to the station with me."

"Very well."

At the moment of leave-taking, struck by her seeming unconsciousness, he
whispered to her as he pressed her to his heart:

"I have given you much sorrow, Mother."

"Yes, a great deal."

"You must not desert me."

"Oh, I ..."

"I am going to confide Marie-Louise and Philippe to you. You will watch
over them, from afar, you will see them sometimes. If you have any
worries to bear on their account, you will bear them for me."

"You know that quite well."

"Au revoir, Mother, I shall come back."

"May God watch over you!"

The door closed. He had forgotten Fanchette who was awaiting her turn,
wiping her eyes on her apron. Mme. Derize came back, with a slower step,
into the deserted little drawing-room. She reached the window, to see
her son once more, as he was leaving the house. She was thinking:

"He did not come for me, nor for Elizabeth, nor for the children. Some
day, however, I feel it, I am sure, he will come back to them, to us.
Perhaps it will not be for a very long time. Let us hope that the evil
he will have done will not be irretrievable."

Albert, looking up, saw a light in the window which framed a black
figure. But he did not hear his mother, who, bending down, was calling
to him in a beseeching voice.

And on his way to the station, in the carriage with his friend, he did
not say a word.




PART II


I

THE OTHER SIDE OF THE WORLD


In the beginning of July, the lime trees in the city park at Grenoble
were, in addition to their shade, still giving forth the heavy scent of
their fading flowers. A light breeze to offset the heat of the sun could
be found--there and under the trees on the promenade L'Ile Verte, where
nobody goes, and where even the nurses do not willingly take their
little charges.

After having thrown some bread to the black swan who caught it in his
red beak with a loud splash, Marie-Louise and Philippe Derize, who had
been summoned home, were saying good-by to their little friends, Jeanne
and Renée de Crozet, who were earnestly telling of their early
departure.

"We are going to Aix-Les-Bains this year."

"And we are going to Uriage," replied Marie-Louise who was never at a
loss for an answer.

"Saint-Martin," explained her stolid brother. "It is in the woods."

But the little girl promptly contradicted him:

"No, Uriage, it is more fashionable."

She thought she had eclipsed Aix-Les-Bains. She loved to excel. On the
way back Philippe protested:

"Our house is at Saint-Martin. It is in the mountains."

"Yes, but we are going to Uriage. You, you sleep like a trunk at night."

"I don't sleep like a trunk. Trunks don't sleep!"

"Grandpa says so. I listen at the open door, and have heard that we were
going to Uriage not to Saint Martin. And Grandmother said that papa was
dead to us."

"What's that 'dead'?"

"It is when you are buried."

"I don't want papa to be buried."

The little girl glanced at him with superiority and began to explain in
trying to recall some new expression that she had overheard.

"Well, not exactly. That's what is so funny; he is not dead at all, and
he is dead to us."

"Shall we see him again?"

"Of course. But you must not say so."

She inherited from her father, with his curiosity and high spirit, a
definite confidence in the future.

The child was not wrong about her mother's summer plans. The Derize
family generally left Paris from July until November, spending the
summer and part of the autumn at Saint Martin, a village built on the
side of the mountain of Chamrousse among the lime and chestnut trees,
above the castle of Saint-Ferriol. They lived in the old family mansion
which Albert had inherited. It was a large châlet with its beams set in
stone; with verandahs all round it, and green shutters to its windows.
An avenue of plane-trees led from the house to the church. Mme. Derize,
senior, had a room there, so vacation time was the best of the year for
her. Out of doors all day long, the children acquired complexions like
the country folk; and their cheeks grew rosy like winter apples. Albert
worked undisturbed on his "History of the Peasant" and listened to the
soothing voices of Nature which sang themselves into his book. But
sometimes when nightfall began to come earlier, Elizabeth found that
this simple life was growing monotonous; from the heart of the valley
came echoes of festivity, the animation of a happy little village; above
all she feared the solitude which forces one to seek distraction and
happiness within.

The Molay-Norrois rented a villa at Uriage, where they met a gathering
of their acquaintances. When the heat made Grenoble unbearable, they
easily persuaded their daughter to follow them.

"Why should you shut yourself up in that great lonely barn? What if your
husband should take it into his head to return? Come with us--you will
be much more at ease."

She had listened to them. In her husband's absence she was beginning to
experience again emotions long since forgotten--fear and uneasiness. And
the mere thought of the house at St. Martin with its long corridors, its
suites of rooms and the monotonous silence of the country, depressed
her.

Uriage, three or four miles from Grenoble, and 1500 feet above the sea,
easy of access, and quite near the lowland, has at the same time a
beautiful view and the invigorating air of the mountain. It is reached
through a somewhat narrow and wooded ravine, at the end of which runs a
peaceful streamlet--Le Sonnant. After a turn in the road there is a
little hill crowned by the castle of Saint Ferriol with its ancient
battlements (of which terraces have been made), its towers and its
gables. Having encircled it, one finally comes into the valley of
Vaulnaveys, where the bathing station is built. This valley of
Vaulnaveys, very limited in extent, bounded by the Cross of Chamrousse
and the mountain Les Quatre Seigneurs, has been compared to a vessel of
which the bow might be the castle of Saint-Ferriol and the stern that of
Vizille, doubly historic since it was rebuilt by Lesdiguières and
occupied in 1789 by the Assembly of the States of Dauphiné. It
resembles a little oasis of fresh verdure between the slopes of woods
and prairies. Owing to the supply of water the grass there is as bright
as in an English countryside. Here and there it has been mown to make a
tennis court, walks, and even a race course.

The Villa Mélèzes which the Molay-Norrois rented for the season stands
against the Chamrousse along the sloping road which leads from Uriage to
the castle of Saint Ferriol, so that it commands a view of the valley.
Pine trees at the back and rose trees in front seem in opposition the
one to the other, as happens frequently in this little corner of the
world; comparable, as it were, to those faces whose natural sweetness is
at first concealed under a serious expression.

On an afternoon in July, Mme. Passerat's motor brought the guests of
Mélèzes to their door. She occupied a neighboring villa, where she
received the old Counsellor Prémereux (jestingly called her duenna),
and the Vimelles; while the Bonnard-Bassons had taken a house a little
below. These ladies made all sorts of plans, and Mme. Bonnard-Basson had
already discovered on the list of visitors the names of several
aristocrats whom she was eager to meet. Marie Louise declared at once
that it was much prettier here than at Saint Martin; but little Philippe
somewhat startled by the speed of the journey reserved his opinion.
Elizabeth saw, above all, her opportunity for avoiding loneliness.

Nobody, in this affair, had given a thought to Albert's mother who was
still in Grenoble, despite the heat, and was to be deprived of her
little grandchildren. With the best of intentions one cannot please
everybody.

As a result of her peculiar position Elizabeth had decided to live very
quietly. She had spoken of it to her mother who had approved of her
attitude. At first she herself took the two children out walking,
manifested a reserved manner with persons whom she knew, and did not
come into the drawing-room when there were visitors. One morning, as she
was crossing the lawn in front of the casino, with Philippe and Marie
Louise, whom she was scolding for picking a flower there, she overheard
two young men conversing as follows:

"That is Mme. Albert Derize."

"The wife of the historian?"

"Yes."

"She is very pretty."

She blushed at this compliment intentionally spoken in too loud a tone,
but was not displeased to be noticed for something other than the name
she bore, which was a burden to her. Her attorney had promised her that
at the opening of the courts, separation would be granted without delay
in her favor, more especially since the defendant, not having as yet
taken any steps, would probably not appear, signifying that he did not
intend to enter a counter action. So there would be time to organize her
life anew. Until then there was nothing to do but wait, since she lacked
nothing and had all the advantages of a home.

But this home grew more lively from day to day. There were motor parties
to which she was always invited with the children. She refused; but her
friends protested so vehemently or so persuasively that finally she was
forced to accept. Thus she found herself in a social whirl. She was
taken to the castle of Vizille which rears its enormous mass of gray
stone above the blue Romanche; to the old bridge of Claix whose arch is
so high that it frames the whole landscape, and over the plain of
Matheysine to the little lakes of Laffrey, whose dark waters add a touch
of charm to the severity of the neighboring mountains. These short
afternoon excursions were gradually prolonged: the Grande Chartreuse,
the Lautaret Pass at the foot of the Grand Galibier or to Vercors, where
the picturesque Pont-en-Royans, carved out of the rock, rises
perpendicularly from the water in the shadow of the castle ruins. The
forty-horse power car belonging to the Passerats led the way for the
inferior machine of the Bonnard-Bassons, which was driven by M. de
Vimelle, as favored in physique as he was weak in intellect. They bought
provisions and lunched gayly on the grass, at the edge of a stream, or
they went to some quiet inn which they promptly enlivened. Marie Louise
was collecting souvenirs to dazzle Jeanne and Renée de Crozet, who had
sent remarkable post-cards from Aix-Les-Bains. How could they break up
the party at night after such pleasant days? Elizabeth used as a pretext
the fact of having to put her two little ones to bed, who were overtired
by the long ride, but could give no excuse for not rejoining the party.
Home life which had never attracted her, was especially unpleasant to
her now. She enjoyed a succession of aimless days, and soon ceased
trying to hold herself aloof.

Her parents were obliged to return the hospitality they had accepted.
When she appeared in a nile green gown, which she had only worn once at
the Duchess of Béard's before the event which had upset her life, she
saw in the women's looks that they were not genuinely sincere in the
touching sympathy they expressed to her on every occasion. The
new-comers in their set made a great deal of her with that easy freedom
which results from the absence of a woman's husband. Although she was
the least décolleté of all the women, she felt a new awkwardness,
which recalled her début as a young girl, in feeling her shoulders
exposed: shoulders, whose mother-of-pearl whiteness was greatly admired.
She had the impression that this was not her place, and her personal
success only half dispelled the idea.

She felt it again, one day as she was walking with her children to Saint
Martin d'Uriage. The closed châlet where she had spent so many peaceful
summers, the church near-by, the charm of this hamlet lost in the woods,
stirred her emotions which sensed the influence of places, as of people.
She opened the chapel door, and in her prayer--very short because of her
impatient companions--she had time to ask herself if this continual
round of gayety were a normal existence for one in her position; if such
habits of going about, of amusement and of pleasure, would not later
spoil the precocious imagination of Marie Louise and Philippe, who,
while rolling about in the grass and playing with the little peasants,
were acquiring, along with good health, simplicity of heart. To her
great astonishment, on the plane-tree avenue, the little boy, without
bashfulness, asked when they would go home, but Marie Louise, blushing
and cuddling up to her mother, said:

"And papa?"

"He is away, traveling," she replied evasively.

The little girl, finding again an important association of her short
past experience, became nervous and her little bosom heaved.

"When I was a child," she said excitedly, "I lived here. Papa took me
away, far away to the mountains. He carried me on his back when I was
tired."

"And me too," cried Philippe, who was not going to be left behind.

"He laughed all the time," Marie Louise recalled again.

Their mother was lost in silence at these recollections. She roamed
along the enclosure which protected the deserted property, looked at the
faded bunches of wistaria, the garden in disorder and the destruction
due to neglect; then, saddened, she led her children to the path which
winds by many turns towards the castle and the lawns of Uriage. In the
evening she invented a headache to refuse at the last moment an
invitation which she had already accepted, but the next day and the day
after, new opportunities offered, and she soon ceased to struggle
against so swift a tide. Her friends purposely selected as her dinner
partners--not without thought of consolation--their most charming
men-guests, but she was not conscious of their intentions. After the
fifteenth of August, Philippe Lagier came and stayed at the best hotel
near the casino. There was nothing unusual about his being there. He
took advantage of the closing of court to rest in the valley where one
breathes the mountain air; every year the bar and magistrates of
Grenoble are well represented here. He was immediately surrounded and
overwhelmed with invitations; for he brought with him an element of
interest into Mme. Passerat's little circle. His caustic wit, his
constant irony, his travels and his taste for the plastic arts gave a
varied turn to the conversation which made him very much sought after by
women: they like the little excitement occasioned by clever paradoxes or
original and boldly defended opinions. And so by general consent, it was
agreed that Elizabeth and her husband's lawyer be brought together, and
that so interesting a flirtation be aided and abetted.

Scorching through Uriage one day, trying to break a record, the little
clerk Malaunay, in plaid knickers and with bare calves, bending over his
bicycle as if he wished to bite the handle bars, still had eyes to see
the young woman and her companion, as they were watching the races, so
that the Tabourin office and indeed all Grenoble knew the truth about
their friendship.

Philippe Lagier, in visiting Elizabeth, simply fulfilled a duty which
gave him renewed pleasure every day. After the useless preliminaries of
reconciliation, the deed of separation had been sent out. It had to be
answered in Albert's name, so Albert meant to seek a divorce, and in
turn take the offensive. Before drawing up such embarrassing
conclusions, the lawyer had gone to the Boulevard des Adieux to consult
someone for whose advice he had the greatest regard.

"Here," he had explained to Mme. Derize Senior, "is what your son wishes
to reply. He is not going to defend himself any longer; he is attacking.
He has given me the private diary he has kept intermittently since his
marriage. He thinks I am sure to find therein proofs of a continual
grievance; but the incompatibility of temperament is not ground for
divorce. And then, must I make use of this?"

The old lady had asked to be allowed to read these books. Her son had
given permission. She had returned them to Philippe with these words:

"Albert would dishonor himself if he made public use of such writings.
The charges he brings against his wife will not affect the court. But
they will perhaps wound Elizabeth's heart. She is a good woman,
unfortunately too inattentive and indifferent, like so many good women.
Ah, if they would only open their eyes! Show her this diary, make her
promise to read it."

"This diary?" the astonished lawyer had objected. "Would it be right?
Albert tells of his love in it."

"With things as they are, I see only this resort to try. Let her face
this interpretation of her own life. She will even realize that this
love which I abhor, but which has nothing evil about it, has something
to do with her, that it has been born of her unwise carelessness. If she
understands, perhaps she will find the courage to pardon and, above all,
the patience to wait. If she does not understand, it would be better for
Albert to legally give up his children whom he has already forgotten too
much, rather than to hurt their mother. Yes, I can see only this way of
reconciliation, unusual and dangerous though it be. My friend, go up to
Uriage; I count on you. For my part, I shall ask Albert to cease
defending himself, if he must use such arguments."

"But he wants a divorce."

Like a Christian she answered:

"'Men have no power to put asunder whom God has joined together.' Life
in its brevity still gives us time to exhaust our passion and to
recognize the right road, however late. Divorce is irreparable. If he
divorces her, I shall not survive it; I will tell him so, if need be."

Philippe had bowed. This little shabby flat was the only place in the
world where he left his skepticism outside the door.

Now, before giving up his weapons to his charming antagonist, he wished
to observe and study her. He purposely acted deliberately. That is
rather the habit of a complex mind. A little earlier in the summer he
would have found indications of uneasiness in her glances, and in her
social retirement. But when he arrived at Uriage she was quite calm and
allowed herself distraction. The coterie of admirers which her friends
slyly arranged for her only served to irritate the lawyer. It was
composed of insignificant young men, of whom there are many at the
watering-places, who would inevitably attract a woman so young and so
neglected. Why should they not believe that she was easy prey, being
insufficiently protected by lax parents who were absorbed in their own
worldly interests? Elizabeth endured them without ennui, but without
pleasure. Philippe sent his shafts among them; the on-lookers who were
amusing themselves about it, introduced him to take the place of all
these admirers, and the young woman did not even deign to notice their
absence.

What was he expecting from these meetings? His plans and unforeseen
opportunities provided a reason for the necessary interviews. He decided
to take Albert's note-books to Elizabeth. She received him in the
garden, where, before a background of pines and birches, a few
clambering roses were blooming: it was already September.

"What is that package?" she asked him jestingly.

He used that bantering tone which destroys all positive convictions and
ultimately leads to a mental attitude that can take nothing seriously.

"Those are your faults. They are many."

"My faults?"

"Have you forgotten our talk at Grenoble. I told you that never in my
career had I known a case of divorce where all the grievances were on
one side. You have challenged me to enumerate yours. Here they are."

"Well, I am listening," she replied incredulously.

"No, no, you will read them."

"You have taken the trouble to write them."

"No--not I."

"Who then?"

But she had already guessed and thought it wiser to be on her guard.

"It is Albert. Take them."

"Oh, no, thank you."

He took no notice of her refusal.

"In two hours you will have time to decipher these notes. You can read
them this evening and return them to me to-morrow."

"I am dining with Mme. Passerat to-night."

"Ah yes,--I am invited, too. And to-morrow?"

"To-morrow we are going to motor to the Castle at Sassenage, and our
evening is engaged too."

"Well, you will find a free day."

"Why do you want me to read these books?"

Her refusal was becoming less positive: this persual imposed no
obligation upon her.

"You will find there the complaint I am going to formulate against you
in my brief."

She was astonished, and blushed, which gave her face the expression of a
young girl about to make her début.

"I thought," she said, "that Albert was going to make no defense."

This noticeable anxiety aroused Philippe Lagier, whose reply was not
without a touch of cruelty.

"He will make so good a defense that he will sue for a divorce--not
separation."

"Ah," she murmured, and the color which had overspread her cheeks faded
quickly.

He immediately regretted having tormented her. Was Albert's viewpoint so
definite that he had a right to use it as a threat? And had he not
decided to play a double rôle, in order to decline to take part in the
trial?

"Does he wish to marry her?" she asked weakly.

"I do not know."

But she was ashamed of her question and quickly expressed her
indifference.

"Oh, it's all the same to me. He may do as he likes; he is dead to me."

It is true that she added, unconscious of her contradiction:

"Very well, leave me the books. I will glance over them when I have a
moment to spare, and shall return them to you."

That evening at Mme. Passerat's dinner, Elizabeth, usually so poised and
calm, evidenced nervousness; and he did not doubt that she had at once
begun the reading of her husband's diary. During dessert he leaned
toward her and questioned her in a low voice. Mme. de Vimelle, seated at
the other end of the table, made use of this to give vent to a spiteful
reflection.

"Have you read it?" he asked.

"What? ... No, no, not yet. I have not thought of it."

He thought she was feigning astonishment, and seeing her so good an
actress, he retracted that impertinent patronage which he had accorded
her so-called simplicity. But he was wrong. She had carefully arranged
Albert's note-books and was only awaiting the opportunity to take them
out of the bureau. The past was the past. It could not be changed. Being
a woman of order and logical mind, she liked definite situations. This
reversion to the past did not attract her. With what had she to reproach
herself? Nothing, according to the world's opinion, absolutely nothing.
Then of what could anyone accuse her, who had been so abominably
deceived, and for a woman older and less attractive than she?

Another cause had contributed to her confusion. She had been the first
arrival at Mme. Passerat's, in order to escape from the temptations of
her own awakened curiosity. The salon on the ground floor was not yet
lighted. In crossing the lawn in front of the villa, walking carefully
because of the dew, she overheard some words of a conversation, the
terms and familiarity of which were significant, and saw, or rather
guessed, from the open window, hardly distinguishable in the shadow,
that a couple whose voices she recognized were sitting there. Without
thinking, she hastily ran across the small space which separated her
from the Mélèzes, and reached her room to hide the shame she felt in
discovering a liaison which her filial devotion would never have
permitted her to suspect. When her mother came to look for her, and
scolded her for being so late, she understood that she must gain control
of herself and keep the secret. If only the poor woman with her might
always remain in ignorance. When the two women entered, Mme. Passerat
received them in that exaggerated manner which has become fashionable,
held both hands of her good friend, Mme. Molay-Norrois, and embraced
that dear Elizabeth who unresponsively suffered her kiss, but was upset
by it all evening. Thus she appeared excited and uneasy to the observant
Philippe Lagier.

Two days later, not having seen her in the interim, he inquired again.

"And our book of grievances?"

This was the name he had given to the private diary of his friend. She
still requested more time, and for some days he did not meet her. Indeed
she went out seldom. She had proposed to take her parents to Saint
Martin to finish the season there; but her father laughed at the offer
and her mother never disagreed with him.

Philippe attributed her sudden reserve to her impression of the reading.
He was surprised, and unconsciously annoyed at the power which Albert
continued to exercise over her from afar. And to add to his irritation,
his friend informed him in a letter bearing the German postmark, that he
had given up the idea of defending himself in court, and had changed his
plan of divorce; perhaps he had listened to his mother's advice, or else
his well-ordered mind revolted against the issue of an open breach, or
perhaps he had agreed with Anne de Sézery to defy the law.

When the lawyer at last succeeded in joining Elizabeth, he avoided
revealing this new situation to her, as if he no longer intended to
reconcile her and her husband, and he did not even ask for the
note-books. But he tried to distract her, to amuse her by his
conversation.

It hardly seemed the beginning of September with its earlier sunsets,
more vaporous lines at the mountain summit less clear on the horizon,
and its sharper air. The well-watered lawns retained their even green,
and as for the clumps of pines, ever green, they need never fear the
threats of Autumn. Elizabeth had come as far as the tennis court, but
had declined to take part in the game. She instinctively sought out
places where there was movement, where she was sure not to hear the
voice of her heart or mind. A young brunette in a white flannel dress
draped in straight folds, was enlivening the party with her laughter,
her remarks, her cleverness. Stopping, on the alert for the ball,
running to meet it, or drawing back to return it with all her strength,
each of her movements brought into play the curved and flexible lines of
her well-built body. Thus she was making a series of little Tanagra
studies, and it was a delight to follow her. But she knew it, and from
time to time glanced at Philippe, whose age, fortune, and career she
well knew, for nowadays civilization is perfected. Elizabeth, whose
sorrow had made her keener, noticed this little affair.

"Someone is looking at you," she said.

"I am no longer in the marriage market." And it was he who in his droll
manner pointed out all the flirtations which were going on about them.
M. de Vimelle, slender and very graceful, was disappearing under the
trees with Mme. Bonnard-Basson, who, too tightly laced, often stopped to
get her breath. As she was known to be the most scheming young woman in
her set, he said:

"She has managed all the same to reserve some aristocratic admirers for
herself."

Obliging Mme. de Vimelle had loaned her husband to her friend to take
her out walking before dinner.

"I don't understand it," replied Elizabeth to the sarcastic observations
of her partner.

"Bah, M. de Vimelle, who is ruined, is besides, the stupidest animal
between Paris and Peru--Japan and Rome. She uses him as best she can."

"Nobody finds grace in your eyes."

"I go about with my eyes open."

"You had better close them."

Mlle. Rivière, who had won the last set, as well as all the preceding
ones, came over to wish them good evening. Her dull complexion, heated
by the game, had become a deep scarlet, and seemed to be burning. Her
white teeth glistened. Her eyes sparkled.

"It is a great game," Philippe explained, close behind her, scorning the
evident interest she showed. "Her whole soul is in her face."

For several days he had been familiarizing the young woman with all the
scandals of their set, making her realize how unimportant they were
considered. His insolent and distressing pessimism fell upon prepared
soil. Elizabeth, after the shock of her father's conduct, found her
illusions completely destroyed.

After many handshakes had been exchanged, tennis was given up. Although
the mountains were still covered with the oblique rays of the sun, the
valley was in shadow.

There was a definite line of demarcation between themselves and the
others. Nobody had joined them. They alone remained behind, as if their
tête-à-tête were respected. Vaguely disturbed by this seclusion,
Elizabeth directed their steps towards the Mélèzes.

"When the night comes on here it looks as though the mountains were
coming nearer and the pine trees were drawing nearer, as if to envelop
us."

In order to calm her, Philippe came closer, and murmured in a
confidential tone.

"Why are you so sad now-a-days?"

"I am not sad."

Without regarding this denial, leaning toward her, he continued, in a
voice which had ceased to be strident, but became, instead, full of
charming inflections, cultivated by that art with which he touched such
varied chords at the bar:

"You think your life is finished when it is only just beginning. And
life can be so beautiful...."

She found no ready answer. She was often given to self-pity; in thinking
now of her keen suffering for one so young and through no fault of her
own, it seemed to her like a new misfortune. Understanding that she was
depressed by this introspection, he pointed out the mountain tops which
were priding themselves on still retaining the light; then he pointed to
the plain, towards the meadows and the woods which were in peaceful
repose. Two or three couples, rather far away from them, acknowledged
lovers, and so accepted socially by general agreement, were returning to
the villas and hotels.

"We are very comfortable here, are we not? When I came to Uriage you
were so popular, so sought after ..."

She did not grasp the exact meaning of the last word.

"I did not notice it," she said.

"I noticed it for you," said Philippe.

In a low voice, choosing his words with care, he continued:

"If you only knew how that irritated me."

"Why?" she asked naively, as they were passing through a little cluster
of pine trees which hid them from sight.

Nevertheless, she hastened her steps. It was not yet the psychological
moment. The love-making of a man of forty is more clear-sighted and
artful, less hurried than that of a young man. He evaded the issue,
rather than declare himself.

"When you were a young girl, I had dreamed of asking you to marry me."

"So I have been told."

"Ah.... If you had been happy, I should not have recalled it. I should
never have reminded you of it. But I cannot bear the look of pain that
crosses your face. You are so young. So many years are before you to
retrieve the grief of the past."

She stopped, overwhelmed, trembling. So many years ... Yes ... until the
old age of her father. The errors of the past: the soul of Autumn, Anne
de Sézery. That was the beauty of living!

"Why do you speak to me like this?" she said in a stifled voice.

He read trouble and confusion in her frightened eyes, which stared at
him, and so mistaking her attitude, he dared to hold the young woman's
hands affectionately.

"I am so sorry for you. Do you not understand?"

She freed herself, tried to recover her breath, then rebelliously
protested:

"You! ... Oh, you! ... Leave me."

"Madame," he begged.

But she had already fled down the path. Motionless, his feet rooted to
the spot, he watched her distinct figure until a tree suddenly hid her
from sight. Then, seeking support, he threw himself on the grass. His
deepest emotions were always controlled and lent themselves to the
demands of reason. He pleaded in his own defense the extenuating
circumstances of the hour, the season, his vanishing youth. Can a man
see with impunity almost daily a young woman of charm, who shows that
she takes pleasure in his society? He tried unsuccessfully to become
tender in thinking about himself, his loneliness intensified by a
superior mentality, hampered in his search for happiness by hesitation,
excessive analysis and disenchantment. One thought alone, which he tried
to put away with all his force, overlapped all others, as a higher and
swifter wave submerges those which precede it: he had betrayed his
friend. After one last thought of Albert's aversion, he gave way to his
self-contempt, and lying on the earth, his face hidden, humiliated in
his faith in himself, he wept tears of despair. This was a moment which
he no longer had the power to dismiss; henceforth, its remembrance must
come to him relentlessly every time he sought the silence of his inmost
heart....




II

THE WATCH


Elizabeth hurried to her room, as a bird with heavy wings beaten down by
a tempest rushes to find shelter. Her mouth somewhat twisted, her lips
dry, her limbs wearied by the effort to climb the stairs, she fell into
an armchair, where, alone with herself, she could better bear her state
of fatigue, and uneasiness of heart. This scene had been surprising and
terrifying to her, who disliked violent or even unexpected sensations,
and sought nothing but peace, order and daily unvarying monotony.
Darkness, kind charitable darkness, enveloping her like a veil which
hangs lightly from the shoulders, lessened her indignation, but made her
more self-pitying. She was confiding in herself as in a friend, and so
found relief, when her mother came in, scarcely touching the door, as if
in the intimacy of the family, it were almost unnecessary to announce
oneself.

"Elizabeth," called Mme. de Molay-Norrois.

Elizabeth did not answer at once, finding added vexation in the fact
that she who was so seldom in need of it, was even at this time unable
to have a corner in which she might take refuge undisturbed.

"You are tired--why did you not ring?"

"I am not tired, Mamma."

How could she stem this maternal solicitude? Mme. Molay-Norrois had
already lighted a lamp, closed the window to keep out the mosquitoes and
the September breeze, and was studying the dear face, whose every
expression she knew.

"You are flushed. You have been crying. And you have told me nothing."

"I have a headache, that is all."

"A headache? You were out all afternoon. It is not a headache. You have
some trouble and you will not tell me."

For the first time the young woman understood that even with those who
love one best, one is often alone, and that any presence, even the
dearest, may be intolerable. For the first time too, she really
understood the tone of voice in which she was being addressed; the one
which is suited to little girls, to encourage them, or quiet and control
them. By what inexplicable mistake did they continue to use it in
speaking to her? Misfortune itself had matured her, and yet they treated
her like a little child. Her sadness was intensified by it, as is the
pain of a wound that is inflamed by unskillful care.

"There is nothing the matter," she reaffirmed.

Her mother, baffled, was surprised and sorry, and finally, to change the
subject, said in an off-hand manner:

"We are dining with the Vimelles to-night; you have just about time to
get ready."

"I shall not go."

"What? You have accepted their invitation. It is too late to refuse.
Then, the other day you declined at the last minute. And you have just
told me you are not ill--no, no, you must come; it is absolutely
necessary."

"Nevertheless, I shall not go," Elizabeth repeated with a new note of
authority.

For Mme. Molay-Norrois there were no small and great events. She valued
equally social obligations and those which concerned the serious affairs
of life. Her daughter's defiance shocked her respect for the laws of
society, as much as it offended her affection which she now considered
to be of no avail. She tried to coax her with gentle insistence which
she finally saw would produce no result.

After her departure and slight thought of regret concerning the
misunderstanding, Elizabeth found joy in again indulging her melancholy.
She was soon aroused out of it, however, by her father who did not even
knock at the door, and came in quite unceremoniously, dashing, beaming,
smiling, his eyes bright, his mustache curled and a rose bud in the
buttonhole of his dinner coat.

"He, too!" she thought, irritated and cross.

He paid no attention to her unfriendly attitude. He never needed to
exert himself with Elizabeth, who was always so tractable.

"Well, little one?" he asked, playfully. "You have nerves, you have
asserted yourself, you have made your mother cry, and she is crying, on
my word! She certainly needs very little to make her weep."

Curled up in her chair, she did not deign to answer him, and to avoid
saying too much, she drew her lips together, so that her mouth was tight
shut. Despite his white hair, he was very lively in his evening attire.
If he had had any idea of what she was thinking of him, he would have
ceased to annoy her.

"Are you ill? No ...? Besides, women's nerves! Come along with us. The
Vimelles will be so offended if you do not come. Philippe Lagier will
amuse you. He is witty and lively. He is rather making love to you,
Philippe Lagier, eh. Eh!"

"No one is making love to me."

She said this in such a peremptory way that he stopped short in his
teasing. This little girl was certainly in a bad temper; it was better
after all to leave her to sulk as she would. The art of living was fast
disappearing when people no longer knew how to conceal their troubles,
to bear them with fortitude, in order not to burden their neighbors.
Society would soon sanction discussing one's private affairs publicly
and wearing a sorrowful expression. And that was the inevitable result
of a long period of democracy. So now he only thought of hastening his
departure. Happily he found some comfort in seeing his face, still
fresh, reflected in the mirror of the wardrobe.

"Well, rest, little one, if you are tired."

This expression of interest satisfied his paternal dignity, and as soon
as he was out in the corridor, he cheered up.

Elizabeth, thus disturbed, was trying with difficulty to recover the
lost trend of her reflections, when her children, having heard of her
return, rushed into the room. They had just come in from their walk, and
made a great noise with their hobnailed shoes. They were surprised not
to see her in evening dress.

"You will be late," declared Marie Louise.

"I am dining with you, my darlings."

"Oh! Oh!" cried Philippe joyfully, using his big voice like a bell.

And the little girl was already calling from the staircase.

"Agatha, set three places."

Nothing pleased her so well as giving orders, except listening to
stories or teasing her brother.

At table she did the honors of the dinner, as if her mother were a
guest. Elizabeth was amused, but not without a touch of bitterness,
noting therein the result of her frequent evenings away from them. Her
mind receptive, she also realized that her children, entrusted too much
to the care of servants, were losing many of their good habits; the one
being proud of all the luxury she enjoyed, and particularly of the
Passerat's beautiful motor with which to dazzle her less-favored
playfellows; the other eating with his fingers and using kitchen slang
in his conversation. Little disposed to scold them, she promised herself
to look after them more carefully and to begin to put them to bed
herself, a fact of which little Philippe took advantage to show her all
the tricks he had learned to do in his night-shirt.

As soon as he was in bed, all curled up with his knees almost under his
chin, the little man fell asleep, and, once asleep, he did not move any
more than a trunk,--a habit for which Marie Louise took him to task.
She, on the other hand, fought sleep with obstinate resistance, and only
gave in at last when her eyelids could no longer keep open to see the
light of the lamp.

"Tell me a story," she asked when she was tucked in.

Elizabeth sat down beside her and thought her being there would soothe
her.

"I don't know one."

"Papa always knew some."

She rarely spoke of her father. This remembrance astonished the young
woman and was not pleasant to her.

"Yes," said the little girl, "the one about Jeanne d'Arc and about
Cyclops."

"About Cyclops?"

"Y es, the one who had only one eye in the middle of his forehead, and
who let the sheep get away from him."

Albert Derize had willingly pruned the forest of the epics, the Iliad,
the Odyssey, the "Song of Roland" like any good woodman, to make of them
playthings for his children.

"Go to sleep, darling, go to sleep."

"Well, I shall have to tell you one, Mamma."

"You must go to sleep."

"The one about the cup of happiness, if you like. There was once a
knight who had a very sad wife in his castle. And she went to sleep when
he was away hunting. And then he saw fairies dancing--do fairies dance?"

"Of course, they do. Go to sleep."

"And he saw one there who was the most beautiful of all, and she carried
a golden cup with diamonds. It was not for champagne. It was the cup of
happiness."

Her mother bent over her, thinking she was asleep, but the little voice
continued faintly after a moment.

"So the knight tore it from her hands and rode off on his horse and
escaped, and he made a present of it."

"To whom?" Elizabeth asked mechanically.

"To the lady ... who was sad in the castle ... and he went to sleep when
he was hunting...."

The story went on like this in a circle, but at last the lids with
their long lashes ceased fluttering like little wings, and after two or
three nervous movements, the child went to sleep on her pillow of golden
curls.

Elizabeth stood motionless for some time comparing the sleep of Marie
Louise with that of her brother. She was a much more imaginative child,
of finer sensibility, who had to be soothed and strengthened. This duty
devolved on the mother alone--now that Albert was no longer there.
Albert? Where was he now? Could he desert them? She did not love him
now, but when he was there, she felt the house was stronger, better
protected from all harm.

To escape this recollection which tormented her, close to her children,
she got up and went to her room near by. She half closed the door after
her without entirely shutting it, that she might hear the least sound
and be out of the draught. After taking these precautions she hastened
to open the window, as she was exceedingly warm.

The moon had risen, but was hidden by the roof, and its light resembled
a cloth spread over the country. The numerous lawns, without a shadow,
unfolded themselves in the distance, smooth, pale and even, only broken
here and there by groups of trees, standing like mysterious conspirators
in the dark. Scattered stars twinkled on the edge of the horizon,
without forming very distinct constellations. And over the neighboring
villa, where the Passerats were living, a larch tree stood out, its
curved branches outlining the silhouette of a pagoda on the wall.

This silence, this peace which Elizabeth thought she would enjoy on the
balcony with the scent of the rose bushes, was disturbed by the noise of
fireworks that were being let off at the casino. Rockets sprang up with
a loud report, disappeared into the air and fell back again in a colored
rain, whose effect was half-destroyed by the moonlight. And this was the
signal for shrieks, applause, the expression of festivity, mingled with
the fanfare of trumpets.

She went back into the room. The noise of her heart was sufficient for
her. Nothing could lessen the impression of disgust that Philippe
Lagier's avowal had left upon her, and which she could not forget, as
she went from room to room. She drank a glass of water into which she
had poured a few drops of ammonia and aniseed to take away the taste of
ashes which her lips retained. But they were immediately dry again. A
half forgotten, unexpected, almost ludicrous recollection of her
childhood came suddenly, to give concrete meaning to her impressions. As
a little girl she had read in mythology that there were men with goats'
hoofs called fauns. Amused at this peculiarity, she had spent an entire
day gazing at the passers-by in the street. "Have you met any?" her best
friend and confidante, Blanche Servin, asked incredulously. In order not
to make her book seem untrue, she had replied: "How can one tell if they
have shoes on?" Our dispositions exert so much influence upon our
individual interpretation of things that this old recollection, instead
of being a diversion to her, satisfied her desire for revolt and
augmented her dislike. One must see life clearly. Well! she had opened
her eyes, and saw about her only ignominy and the basest deception, not
even glossed over by the outward decency. One woman had a lover, not for
love, but to appear up-to-date. Another took advantage of her husband's
liaison. That old man--her father--allowed his mistress to be on
friendly terms with his wife and daughter. And as to that honor--of
which men pretend to make a religion, even if they have renounced every
other law, she knew what to think of that, since the lawyer, the
counsel, the most intimate friend of Albert hoped to profit by these
services to offer himself as a comforter. There was no happy medium
between the blindness of her mother, her own before her separation, and
the recognition of this wickedness which haunted her like a nightmare.
To see clearly was to gaze upon the ground, to find the cloven foot.
Bah!

A sigh, then a half stifled cry which she heard from the adjoining room
aroused her from the disgust into which she had sunk as into a
quicksand, made her get up from her chair and walk softly with a
mother's consideration. The little boy had not stirred; he was still in
the same uncomfortable position. It was Marie Louise who was sleeping
restlessly. Elizabeth put back the blanket which the child had thrown
off, and seated herself between the two beds. By the light of the lamp
she looked for a long time from right to left, comparing the motionless
features of the two little sleeping faces, one quite at ease, the other
fidgety and, even in this semi-conscious state, restless, as if the
imagination back of the closed eyelids had remained awake and continued
to work even with the lights out and the stage darkened.

"What will become of these dear mites?" she thought, turning from
thoughts of herself. And the fear of the future brusquely aroused her.
Later on, very soon they would learn what life meant, alone, quite
alone. Even a mother's most tender devotion was powerless. They would
live again the everlasting experience which each must live alone. They
would meet the same sorrows, feel the same bitterness, know the same
despair. For the world would not change for them. She had discovered it
as it is in all its reality. Ah, at least, if she could not protect
them, could not accompany them on the road, ought she not strengthen
them by cultivating their understanding of disillusions, especially the
little girl who took her little joys and sorrows with such intensity and
was not able to distinguish, even in her games, the difference between
fancy and fact, which was never sufficiently attractive to please her
whims?

The night light gave to the objects in the room an animated appearance,
and lengthened the shadows to the ceiling. Elizabeth felt herself
surrounded by dangers and knew the necessity of protecting her children,
threatened as she was. Since her departure from Paris she had given her
entire time to the new life which was arranged for her, in the daily
distraction of which she had forgotten her troubles. But this new life
for herself and the children demanded constant attention and devotion.
Now she was meeting it face to face and she feared it. Her arms hanging
motionless at her side, she gave herself up to the discouragement of the
minute, while she was beginning to grasp the importance of courage.
Never, never would she, so unprepared, educated and trained as she was
for a very ordinary lot, be able to adapt herself to the life before
her.

"The cup of ... happiness ..." stammered Marie Louise in her dreams.

The cup of happiness! What irony this evening! Was it not too unjust
that she should be thus punished for no reason; in the fullness of her
youth be overwhelmed with so many burdens and have so little help! In
her despair she detested Albert, who had deserted her in such cowardly
manner. No doubt he was no worse than others, weak as they were, a slave
to his desires and cruelly selfish. Now she knew him! How he had
deceived her!

"What have I done to him? What have I done to him?" she kept repeating
to herself as she wept.

She thought of the note-books which Philippe Lagier had brought her,
which might furnish an answer to her question. What hypocritical answer?
When the maid came to stay with the children, she went back and lit her
lamp. Quite overcome with suffering and bitterness, her nerves
trembling, she began the reading which kept her awake late into the
night.




III

ALBERT'S DIARY


The note-books belonging to Albert Derize which Philippe Lagier had
given to Elizabeth, contained the story of his life from the month of
January 1902 until April 1905, that is to say from the sixth year of his
marriage until the time of the separation. In accordance with her habit
of regularity, she opened the earliest book at the first page. It was
truly a singular diary; it was difficult to recognize oneself therein.
In the beginning she saw only notes concerning history, observations of
real life, plans of articles, lecture notes hastily written down in a
few lines, short accounts of visits to some historic spot, all that
preparatory work indispensable to an active writer whose brain demands
fresh copy every day. She was at once disheartened, being unused to seek
explanations. Again this return to a dead past seemed so useless to her.
She was about to give up reading, when a little cross marked in blue
pencil caught her eye. The date, underlined with a stroke of the pen,
attracted her attention; May 25th, 1903. It was the anniversary of their
wedding. Four lines recalled it to her memory--she interpreted them with
amazement:


   "To shudder, to weep over life, to pray--
    That is only the coward's way,
    The strong soul stays where his duty lies
    And meets it bravely, suffers and dies."


No comment accompanied this disturbing quotation, so strange to mark an
anniversary. What did it really mean? Of what sorrow, what deep
suffering was it the expression? And why was it marked with that blue
cross? Elizabeth felt a thrill through her whole body, like a hare who
in the safety of her form, hears the hounds approaching. She hesitated
to commence a journey which she knew would be dangerous. Since her
opinion concerning the treachery of her husband was alterable, what was
the use of this painful return to the past? She turned over a leaf;
another blue cross marked a new passage in inverted commas:

"O pictures and visions of my youth, O love glances, divine moments, how
quickly you have vanished! To-day I am thinking of you as of my beloved
dead."

She looked at the quotation marks to reassure herself. Albert used these
note-books as an aid to his memory when transcribing his thoughts and
impressions into his books. What importance then should be attached to
pessimistic literature without foundation in fact? For in reality, May,
1903, signified to her only peaceful days, unvarying, colorless days,
such as she loved to live. She read on and saw the blue crosses becoming
more numerous, here and there replaced by broken lines in the margin,
the entire length of the page. Philippe Lagier had no doubt marked the
paragraphs which he meant to use in the trial with reference to the
conjugal drama for which he was seeking a very far-fetched cause. She
understood this and knew that he was impressed with the two quotations
which had wounded her. She had then but to follow the marks which traced
the way for her.

At the next cross she could no longer retain any illusion. Her own
recollections served her. In the month of June, 1903, for the benefit of
some social work, Albert had given a lecture in Paris on the subject of
marriage, the success of which had been so great that he had been
obliged to repeat it in the provinces and abroad. Now the leading ideas
of this lecture were to be found in the note-book which Elizabeth was
reading.

"On the Education of Woman--Double danger to be avoided: firstly, that
which represses her too much and makes of her a weakened sentimental
creature, a good housewife, a discreet and safe companion knowing little
of her husband's interests, overwhelmed by petty domestic duties,
unequipped to mold men and women; secondly, that which tends to create
the masculine type of woman and to destroy the unity of the family by
depriving it of its master. In the first case the woman thinks of
marriage as a matter-of-fact state, a final solution. She does not
understand that happiness is to be gained or lost every day and needs
constant care and lasting attention. She imagines simply that her
husband's property is to be made over to her once and for all by an
authentic deed. After that there is nothing to do but to allow oneself
to drift along in an aimless life. Why can one not have the time that
these women waste in trifles! Certainly the house is looked after and
one dines punctually. But intellectually and morally the man is alone. A
young girl who is not eager to develop her intelligence has no right to
accept the hand of a real man in marriage.

"In the second case the woman accepts marriage as a means of developing
her personality. She at once becomes a rival, who has all the
advantages. The man who would realize his life in its fullness (and a
man's life as opposed to that of a woman, can never have love alone as
its exclusive object)--needs to find in his home, rest, security and
trust after his work. It is the wife's duty to understand, to accept and
to adorn the life of her husband. Her natural wisdom should uphold and
not retard him. _Socia rei humanae et divinae_. Marriage is arranged
according to material consideration; once entered into, it is accepted
as a fixed custom. And one fine day we are surprised to find that we are
strangers to each other. An unhappy marriage is often made more so by
family differences, particularly when the wife is attached to her own
people and remains indifferent to her husband's. The carelessness and
thoughtlessness of wives break up more households than their
independence of character and their desire for love. To know how to live
in a state of watchfulness is half the art of living...."

There were only these general ideas about education, still somewhat
incoherent, and a woman always hesitates to apply theories to the facts
which underlie them, to draw a direct application from them. But a few
lines further on clearly evidenced the intention of the lecturer.

"There is one who will listen to this quietly and passively and will
accept with a gracious smile at its end the congratulations of her women
friends without having understood a word of it."

Elizabeth, thus referred to, raised her head. She remembered this
conversation, expressed somewhat disdainfully, but which had not been
offensive. She had really understood only the pleasure of being on
parade and well received. Being too indolent to think and form her own
opinion, she agreed quite willingly with all the lecturers whom she
heard. But not being informed, why should she be on her guard? And what
did these allusions, these omissions signify? Still, she did not
understand. What were her faults? What reproaches could he make her? She
could not be appealed to by quotations, and generalities. Why not speak
more frankly?

She took up the note-book again more nervously, on the alert for the
slightest vindication as a warned sentry watches for the approaching
enemy who has been sighted.

The continuation of the diary was dated from Saint Martin d'Uriage. When
the summer came they left Paris. Albert, engaged in the writing of "The
History of the Peasant," no longer needing to make a memorandum of other
subjects, applied himself to analyzing his own mind. Whether he was
growing accustomed to putting his sorrow into words, or whether that
suffering, increasing, rendered him less self-possessed, at any rate,
little by little, not without hesitation, however, he was losing that
reserve which had kept him from revealing his inmost thoughts, and as a
result of which he had thus far concealed them within his literary
annotations or anonymous complaints:


"August, 1903--'Nowadays the world is free to great souls. To those who
are alone or to a couple, many places are open where one can breathe the
fragrance of the silent water.'

"Alone or a couple? Where did Nietzsche imbibe such confidence in love?
If one wished to experience the living presence of his thought, he must
find solitude. For our thought is jealous, restless and austere. We are
alone in our deepest emotions. Art, nature, metaphysics and the past
which is ours to explore, demand that we be alone to understand them. In
marriage it is necessary to keep this solitude intact. One does not give
his intellectual strength to the joint patrimony. The cleverness of the
wife lies perhaps in respecting this, by keeping her distance. If she
does not do so she lowers, weakens, and finally kills it.

"Therefore, why this dream of an absolute intimacy, and why this
melancholy, so poignant at certain times of not having realized it, when
instead, we should rejoic