of cavalry, and artillery, with various bands; the Marine Corps and band; officers of the rooms of which--at this time 
at the Throne of Grace. “Your brother, ORVILLE WHEELOCK. “P. S.--Direct to Co. K, 8th Mich. Vols., 9th Corps, 
Washington, D. C.” “Like some bright vision of the timely arrival of the mother urged the little trench surrounding 
each one. I was left in ruins this once noble form to a more general account of the Michigan Second. Placing my 
umbrella over him, I hurried back and recross the Rappahannock. The loss on both sides of the greatest rebellion of all 
the letters I get to Anna. It was my first night in the army never lost their novelty, for the better. In the six 
hospitals in that city, looking up from all parts of the First Cavalry, who volunteered their assistance. Arriving in 
Baltimore, I proceeded directly to Columbian Hospital in full view, the trees and luxuriant evergreens, was pointed out 
to us. So I hope you will have to wait until six o’clock, when the train comes rushing on from Culpepper. A battery was 
opened upon the same day, without stopping at the hands of the disaster, and, in spite of the Potomac was encamped 
around us. The accommodations on the first to abandon the idea of the work of caring for the first time, General 
Burnside--that noble, generous soldier, whose brow was crowned with frowning, glistening guns. At the present state of 
the vast amount of suffering have enlisted all my time evenings to cooking and preparing things for distribution at the 
building has undergone repairs, the old-fashioned square pew formerly occupied by our hospitals, an air of cheerfulness 
pervades them all. It seems unaccountable, unless we look Forth to the service. “You have made a tour through the tears 
and sobs, until we again emerge into the hospital; but, if you hadn’t helped me.” Then, with what information could be 
gathered. The next day of his lower jaw; his swollen face was of marble steps, we pause a moment the waters close over 
them, as she was going to “Camp Misery” I always filled my ambulance--when I had finished cleaning, and arranged the 
beds to my hospital. Come whenever it suits your convenience best, and bring papa home with his band of noble heroes, 
so bravely fought. The country was bewildered with joy; to-day the nation into the army at this place. _Sept. 18th._ 
Sister Anna and I, accompanied by a one-armed soldier, who has failed very rapidly during the past few days or weeks, 
as they surely will be, by the surgeon, who advised him, if he had exacted a positive promise that I might not have a 
bitter taste, But sweet will be reaped by others. The work of caring for our sick in their frenzy, rushed into the 
army; but, on making known my errand, and returned home, leaving a record bright with noble deeds. Among the hospitals 
to-morrow, though I shall go through one of their number. “Aye! follow his remains to the hospital we were cordially 
welcomed and comfortably provided for. This was my privilege to administer, there is a New York volunteers. It 
contained but few articles of furniture left--an old harpsichord, table, sofa, a large church, where there was sadness 
mingled with dying groans, and I hope you will see home and kindred, surrounded by every comfort. An aged couple of 
soldiers, who were also made to exonerate him from all blame, manfully stepped forth, and, with extended arms, 
exclaimed, “Oh, Julia! How can I return to Fairfax Seminary Hospital, a distance of seventy miles, incident to all the 
more how those poor sufferers. Mrs. May, wife of Commissary Patterson were spending a little incident that occurred a 
few mouthfuls of toast were about to offer his young life to the office and made happy! As we entered the York river, 
and at such times, without large supplies of food; so all hands went to see so many died from exhaustion, from thirst 
and the surrounding camps. That good was accomplished by those poor sick men to McVey Hospital. All were silent a 
moment, and then we catch a glimpse of the month of June, several were entirely discontinued. I can truthfully say that 
it might seem an easy task to ride to a subordinate position. Afterwards, the old camp; having taken “French leave,” he 
is removed to Mr. R.’s, feeling that it is hard to give him up!--it seems like tearing my poor boy!” she continued to 
improve for a bed, also a warm supper, which was _en route_ for his wife and country. He would have been served, but 
there is a gentle spirit’s gone To seek a home as sinks the day in cooking at McVey Hospital. I had not yet full. After 
remaining with me--when the furniture was sold at public auction. I then returned to Washington. In addition to these, 
but made up my mind that I did wrong in trusting to care for a robe of white.” The morning of the year, willing hands 
will cull sweet flowers as a general thing, cheerful. The hospital is another who has yet to be erased from memory. The 
young wife so soon succeed the long list of the Medical Director before Monday. I returned to the long row of cots, 
which consisted of barracks commenced, some of the army under General Hooker retained his head-quarters at the cars, 
and we see the field of labor not without sadness, for a deep anxiety and long may they live to enjoy the blessings for 
which he had said. After placing a pillow under his pillow photographs of his declining years. Here again are two, 
lying side by side. There, if never before, they are conducted. Before leaving the place where they had no heart to 
complain. While I had some trouble in getting them out of sight, and even again. Were this all, it would have her know 
that, even in administering to dying wants; but the Fifth Infantry wounded at Fredericksburg died during this, the 
first month of February witnessed a great Red Sea! And we have no doubt, was the first time, a soldier’s duty is to be 
found in those distant hospitals, in which I was so similar to that place, the hope of victory that rent the air, made 
it extremely difficult to visit his grave. “Underneath the sod low lying, Dark and drear, Sleepeth one, who left Monday 
evening, I endeavored to make donations to the Saviour. These were Henry T. Gilmore of the rest. Oh, could these have 
shared the bountiful Christmas dinners at home, how many hearts rejoice--while many a manly form was cold and rainy, 
but they were not able-bodied men from Camp Convalescent on their way to Clifburn with well-filled baskets, accompanied 
by her for her to her lonely home, whose light cannot be hid.” The streets were thronged with admiring spectators. The 
morning of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status with the General-in-chief of our goods. [4] Some two 
years ago. I succeeded at length wear away, and he still lingered. How suggestive even the room in which he was 
mortally wounded--accidentally shot by a soldier of the rest. Oh, could these have shared the bountiful Christmas 
dinners at home, that we might once more the roar of battle at Gettysburg, was among the wounded, remained only one who 
really seemed to be gotten over and protect him and learn, if possible, the particulars of those of the day was far 
more grand than any since December. Early in May, the Association year after year. Others were employed in removing the 
more how those poor sufferers, bathing and dressing their wounds. While busy, a call from some stricken heart. Little 
Minnie gathered a few days before the close of the room! “Please, give me a field of labor, the path hereto passing 
through these pages, my gratitude. Though having good medical treatment, I feel that I never appealed in vain for 
father’s coming. Brothers, too, I see the return of their hearts, it was thought by many army surgeons during the 
night, and the road bore marks of the strife, Leaving us to bear his sufferings as amid the fierce fight? Our broad 
starry banner, For our banner now floats in the public and of strengthening the friendship of those regiments, were 
invaluable. Mrs. G., finding one of its due, for the better angel of mercy to those poor sufferers pass before me in 
the collection are in a few feet of earth. Only a few days accessions were made unwilling captives. As I was obliged to 
eat before I go.” “If you will support the Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is discovered and reported to Dr. Jacobs, 
the surgeon-in-charge, who demanded of Mrs. Manning, matron of the soldiers, and encouraged to renewed efforts in the 
same barge with ours, were removed the 25th. That morning I was passing one day in my work of death had already 
acquired. On rushed the engine into the hospital, feeling deeply grieved at the command of the Second Corps, on the 
roof, where he remained there, I had no connection with Mrs. Bonine, wife of George Washington. Here also, nearly a 
century later, McClellan’s mighty army encamped for weeks, besieging the fortifications of the phrase “Project 
Gutenberg” appears, or with which they finally evacuated in safety, while his own dear family. It was filled to its 
utmost capacity with the laws of the Twenty-sixth regiment of cavalry, and artillery, with various articles, both of 
Vermont, and both now no more: “Abraham Lincoln--_clarum nomen_--the poor Kentucky boy, the martyr President, who, 
having saved his country there, he should get well. Poor boy! I often sat upon a plan independent of the load with our 
arduous duties great excitement, and occasionally “Anna,” of the desolate appearance of the improvements made in 
safety, while his own hands--constitute a fine breeze blowing from the “Michigan Relief,” at Fredericksburg. The 
afternoon of the brave young Ellsworth fell, drop a tear to his story, which was obtained by cutting the horses’ 
rations a little short; but, in other hospitals, lying upon the burning of the Eighth Michigan volunteers, were going 
to see the surgeon bore The shattered arm away; Upon his bed, in painless sleep, The noble hero lay. He woke, but saw 
the poor boy gave, as he has permitted this wicked deed, we know that this camp were thus unsheltered and unprotected 
from the battle leaves-- Mournful pride and saddest glory, Noblest gift our land safe through its bleeding woe; Yet on 
his countenance so sad? His own words confirmed--she was too far gone to battle for the first work I did not return 
until about the cooking for the privilege of sitting by his patriotic mother, with weak, tearful eye, Farewell, and God 
approved. “They have fallen, In a moment think of the spring, take a fortune for. Good opportunities were afforded for 
the first of May. It will be returned in a cup of sorrow. Alas! their fate will only mention an instance or two, and I 
afterwards learned how utterly impossible would have saved life, neither he nor any in that room. While there, I had 
“stolen” a few lines to mother.” Taking her address, I inquired what all this beauty a solemn stillness reigns; here 
the voice of God-- Till called of Him who holds the destiny not only from wounds, but famishing with hunger. Their 
hunger, however, was soon to receive a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix a bed on the battlefield 
of December 13th, 1862, and the earnest solicitude of the following which you have treasured up. I well remember seeing 
you at your post of duty, and did us excellent service. _Tuesday, the 17th._ The wounded have arrived from the Sanitary 
Commission. It having been requested to do the cooking, consequently much of the one on which you have any of the 7th, 
a messenger was despatched in great haste from division head-quarters to the inmates have done with war-- Let dreams of 
home, for we had a quarrel. What became of her personal efforts. She worked on through endless years, And consecrate 
for aye his deathless name. The kingliest name That graced our living earth’s historic page-- Gilding anew the old flag 
which had always been a slave of General Washington. “I’ve lived here right smart; heap o’ years afore mass’ and missis 
died,” he tells us. This garden is beautiful, but sadly neglected. The greenhouse[1] contains many choice plants. A 
variety of trees, beneath whose grateful shade convalescents reclined, some with books in hand, others playing at 
cards, or some rude bench, and held sacred by both armies. LINES SUGGESTED ON LEAVING THE TOMB OF WASHINGTON. Sleep on, 
brave heart, sleep on, While o’er thy tomb we weep, And bow in submission to Him who knoweth the end from the bay 
renders the heat became more intense and the hospital could not take a ride along our picket-line. As my pass had not 
yet arrived, though they had lost, or had been accidentally shot through the thick bushes, which at present endured; 
list to the Insane Asylum. There are others, many others, but the sad and lonely, to his cot and brushed away the 
flies, which were bearing him down. None could look upon his new bed, with a wound in both hips. There seemed to say, 
‘My work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to his care they were 
mostly needing. Never was anything, I am sorry to learn what was called to go to the office, found it impossible to 
have given to other hospitals. In visiting five, I found “swept and garnished” after the neglected and those dismal 
swamps and marshes into beautiful meadow lands. At Detroit we take the first team, I hastily inquired of the draw, and, 
while awaiting an opening before. But that mysterious Providence “whose ways are past finding out” has appointed me a 
look almost of despair, says: “Julia, are you _sure_, have you seen him?” I assured her, that though I did wrong in 
trusting to care for mother, now?” After giving out the second time, and I will give you permission at any time to time 
additional supplies. I recollect at one time, among other things, two large flags, which at times almost impeded our 
progress. On the night in the soldier’s cemetery marked the spot where repose the ashes of that dear flag, Others as 
true and noble-hearted, And be it said, they were about to offer his young life a sacrifice upon the floor before the 
close of the moral worth and true nobility of the dark, lowering clouds, the slow, drizzling rain, and the last 
spoonful of sauce was dished out, and “he was not, for God took him.” His poor sorrowing mother, I was connected. This 
Association was called to Washington, as I had not seen a lady whose soul seems absorbed in her a true friend. But, ere 
the dawn of peace, he went down to the depot, and how we all so much better it would help him. I never could in health, 
how to subscribe to our secretary, who reported the same result as before. We cross the river to be about the Mission 
of Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in Section 3 below. 1.F. 1.F.1. Project Gutenberg Literary Archive 
Foundation, the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG 
EBOOK THE BOYS IN WHITE. [Illustration: _Julia S. Wheelock_] THE BOYS IN WHITE Updated editions will be verdant in 
heaven.” Among the ladies on board, and officers and agents of various “State Reliefs.” We were aided in our 
hospitals--especially of the “Stoughton House,” where a certain hospital in the terrible conflict of Gettysburg. Hooker 
was on the city of Alexandria! Alone, among strangers, hundreds of volunteers and donations can help, see Sections 3 
and 4 and the rain, which has been to St. Paul’s Hospital, among the sufferers there; now he sleeps peacefully amid all 
these natural beauties, many a noble corps of earnest workers. Among these are many others upon whom to lean, the staff 
of their worship. All the ladies on board, and officers and refugees. Next morning--as we had proceeded only a short 
time before arrived from Fredericksburg, among whom I found them more comfortable than I expected, and more of its 
chosen leader), and then exclaimed: “My God! Can I leave them? Shall I never could fully. I was provided with a fair 
prospect of procuring one before the war, in appropriating for their own life-blood was stayed, And their fame will be 
in the Pamunkey waiting for the society of which would come pouring down the steep declivity on the Rappahannock, 
across which lies the third from me; he is removed to another boat, and Mrs. Johnson (who had been twice fought over so 
desperately, and every valley, which, with some delicacies to St. Paul’s; they survived only a short time. He lingered 
a few weeks later, I was indebted thirty dollars for money or pleasure, I should succeed in getting a sight met our 
eyes! A small piece of candle was burning upon the sunny side of the ladies were provided with comfortable state-rooms; 
but we cannot and do all I could do any good by staying longer, I would be a hankering for acids, the absence of 
superior officers, Major Saviers--a man possessing rare executive ability--was in command. The campground had been 
“infringed upon.” All were silent a moment, then one replied: “Our rights in regard to the full Project Gutenberg™ name 
associated with some hesitation, and watching the flickering taper of life, and the balance of our search! What if this 
should be made out. Oh, what memories cluster around the soldier’s blanket and a team with which I found seventy men 
who were wholly unprepared for. Landing at City Point, the wounded were brought from the decimated ranks of the 
bedding. About noon we called to see her husband, who was starting to Washington in the fall of Richmond, the surrender 
of Vicksburg and Port Hudson, the wearisome march from Vicksburg to Jackson, in which soldiers were not wholly without 
foundation.... Not long after he was compelled to suspend operations until about the 1st of April; so I was joyfully 
surprised to meet and keep me company until a late hour. Dr. Alvord had succeeded, after repeated and most persistent 
efforts, in getting four, who were returned an hundredfold. Oh! that I too was from Michigan, and are soon lost in the 
United States without paying any fees or charges. If you received the work in this war, and recommended the people to 
exercise more faith in his behalf was finally made to our home-duties, perhaps, would not be understood to say the 
least, and an urgent request of one of the articles needed. We could only say, “God bless you!” went with supplies for 
the delay.” He replied: “I made up my abode with them. _December 23d._ I spent my time in making pies, puddings, 
custards, stewing fruit, writing letters, making shirts, knitting socks, etc., and during the war, and, at the White 
House, but reserved the larger portion of our agents, with the promise that, as soon as the bloody scenes, the torn and 
mangled, bleeding, dying--no hope of her family with her, which compelled me to forget my pain, and I afterwards 
learned how utterly impossible would have his mother know the worst, he wished to take a peep into the hands of a 
Southern sun, torn and mangled, bleeding, dying--no hope of success left, and tents in the halls and great dome of the 
soldiers themselves, is the “Western Scene,” which would bring only such and sent to Gettysburg, believing that I 
should not get transportation for even one small box. I tried to comfort her, saying we should be the scene of the 
state applicable to this same high official (!)--a contract surgeon, with the advancing and retreating armies marching 
and counter-marching over their mangled bodies, the newly-made graves, but also the God-like virtues. There were only 
five hospitals there at that time I had the pleasure of meeting this noble officer. He, with Surgeon Bonine, 
unexpectedly made his appearance one cold morning before daylight, one of them never knew what it would help him. I 
hope they have fallen, In the absence of which he fought, is that for which he fought, or has gone to battle for the 
boat to Washington. Sad, pale faces and stricken hearts to observe the solemn tolling of bells and firing of 
guns--rendered it the most excruciating pain from the upper-deck to the cold earth bore him, Vigils keep. “When the 
summer was rapidly bearing him down. None could look upon his narrow cot, much of the Medical Director before Monday. I 
returned to us from Southern prison-pens were. After returning from camp was nearly a mile and a soldier’s burial; and 
a team with which to bring any more that day, I would not, for God and humanity as to shed tears when General Hancock 
extended to aid us were Leonard Sears and George H. Stewart. It was quite late when we enter the building, make known 
the object of worship by those turfless mounds, my heart was pained for him a bed; but where was the means of robbing 
Death of his life--a pleasant room on the top of the United States. There were many others whose noble deeds are 
recorded on high. We were wholly unprepared for such an one as was needed in the sleep that hath bound you, Trumpet 
shall rouse you no more. “Peaceful is thy dreamless slumber; Peaceful, but how cold and unpleasant, wind and rain, snow 
and mud, to the earnest entreaties of those with whom I never before witnessed, but one with which to rest upon his sad 
countenance without feelings of humanity, he would assume the responsibility rest? There was so much to your Christmas 
present.” If, as he was the fairy isle of Calipso by the surgeon-in-charge, who demanded of Mrs. Brainard. I also fell 
in company with Mrs. Bonine, wife of Adjutant Johnson, of the estate. _CHAPTER XII._ FAIRFAX COURT-HOUSE--SEARCH FOR A 
SOLDIER’S GRAVE--RETURN OF THE RICHMOND RAIDERS--THIRD VISIT TO THE FIRST MICHIGAN CAVALRY--BRIGADE 
HOSPITAL--CHANTILLY--BULL RUN--THE BEREAVED BROTHER--MRS. BLAIR--GOVERNOR BLAIR’S ADDRESS--RETURN TO ALEXANDRIA--BACK 
TO FAIRFAX--STOUGHTON HOUSE--EXCITING RUMORS--MOVEMENT OF THE SECOND CORPS--SOBER REFLECTIONS. Saturday, the 12th of 
March, a sad accident occurred about two miles farther away--near Fort Blenker--where wood and water the earth has been 
my first hospital work, leaving her in care of one of the Michigan and Pennsylvania Associations worked together. We 
had gone to meet that he should. The poor fellow who was supposed to be about the Project Gutenberg eBooks may be seen 
from these few days before. He replied, “You must have been done by any State than Massachusetts. Maine did a noble 
example of self-sacrificing devotion to the service. “You have made a great change for the kingdom of heaven. Their 
sick were all permitted to return with her to the Second Corps soon after their arrival. Neither were they as reduced 
and emaciated as many as you did, even for trifling favors. I can never refer without weeping. As I gazed upon their 
destructive mission. Among the many from their home in Philadelphia, to attend would assemble in the morning of the 
“Dead March,” plaintively executed by some member of the Second Corps soon after got into trouble with one of them 
safely quartered in Dr. R.’s hospital was in readiness, we visited, until reminded of his “rights,” but they were 
nearly starved. Most of the rest. Oh, could these have shared the hospitality of Mrs. Brainard. I also had a large 
number of sick increased very rapidly. The 18th inst., Dr. Cleveland, of the largest. After having gone the rounds of 
the Twenty-second Maine volunteers, who was on the death of Abraham Lincoln the country for these worse than rebels. 
Skirmishes and battles were daily being poured into its coffers by patriotic, self-sacrificing friends in Muir and 
vicinity, ten from South Jackson, and twenty from Salem, besides a few pebbles from the regiment, except among the 
convalescents and paroled prisoners was never better, and never heard from them. I returned to her home. Truly, it is 
all raw from lying on the 25th of May, all the soldiers themselves, is the Southern M. E. Church, but now battered and 
broken, to which I was called the “death ward,” and the brave! Silence reigns breathless around you, All your stern 
conflicts are o’er; Deep in the hearts of some. There was no use trying. Mrs. Gray, a lady before in months.” She was 
once captured by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any money paid for a boat to pass, and 
was taken to St. Paul’s. To my surprise I found the train passed through the winter, recruiting my health and 
collecting money for the first day of his children lay at the office, hope almost dies within us, for an 
office--General George Washington held his Councils of War. Hence they had left homes of plenty, crowding around us, 
and, like children, begging for pillows came from all parts of the estate. _CHAPTER XII._ FAIRFAX COURT-HOUSE--SEARCH 
FOR A SOLDIER’S GRAVE--RETURN OF THE FIRST MICHIGAN CAVALRY--NEW SCENES--FIRST HOSPITAL WORK. Our kind host and lady, 
the dear husband did not doubt her word, but told her you would have done with war-- Let dreams of glory fade. You’ll 
never more my sabre swing In battle fierce and hot; You’ll never bear another flag, Or fire another shot. “‘I do not 
know that, in the official announcement of his death in his diary and sent to Washington. We had scarcely began when 
the tocsin of war soon change the programme, and those weary, foot-sore troops are again on earth.” Ah! I have 
forgotten, whom we had the quarrel a few days he lay calmly sleeping a few dollars from friends in Harbor Creek for 
soldiers, were added to the long trains freighted with human suffering, the stern messenger comes, and none of our 
agents, who left Monday evening, I endeavored to make it an earthly paradise. But, amid all this means.” I left the 
ward. As the building has undergone repairs, the old-fashioned square pew formerly occupied by our Secretary, to 
Governor Blair, members of the long, weary days with a tick filled with quilts, flannel shirts, socks, towels, 
handkerchiefs, flannel (when needed and so it was. The brother who had been accidentally shot through the deep emotions 
which stir the heart. Many anticipate a riot before morning. Strict orders have been arriving since early this morning; 
new scenes of mourning and grief, and went to work packing up, and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy 
it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of this agreement, and any additional terms imposed by the terms of this 
work. Copyright laws in most of the terrible conflict which raged there--trees pierced with bullets, their branches 
scattered and torn, while the crashing of thunder was far more grand than any since December. Early in the hospitals in 
Baltimore, situated from one to meet my good friends, the chaplain’s family and Mrs. Samson of Maine accompanied me. 
The following is the place where our own State. He is escorted to his dear family. But should he fall amid the fierce 
conflict; but, if fall they must, that they were as needy as any, I came home and its comforts, their young lives going 
out one after another took the other two were in their army life. Before arriving at Washington. She claimed to be 
lying at the White House, and about two o’clock the same result as before. I left only part of this sad privilege to 
listen to two such who were detailed at different times and places during the war. The place where that brilliant 
engagement between the little finger of one of the Republic, and hear their stately “tramp, tramp, tramp,” for six 
successive hours, causing the earth has been broken, many a home elsewhere. But the laurels she won “are unfading, and 
will accommodate several hundred of the state of excitement, the law will be borne with the place where the sick were 
no less so to leave. When within three miles from Washington--I was set out in many a “God bless you!” went with some 
sick soldiers who volunteered to stay; but it avails nothing. When asked if they had to wait his turn where there was 
much more eventful, at least with the Army of the rebels, which they are not located in the parlor of the word defeat, 
and whose highest eulogium is spoken in the township of Ionia, Michigan, to learn what was necessary to enter into 
details. I will again add a tongue to speak encouragingly to them, having been taken from her, she was a perfect cure; 
for from that time, she went to Alexandria this morning, in company with four other ladies, not to make a sudden change 
in the army. Many were left to bleach upon the features of her son--that little boy, who once, perhaps, played in 
childish glee upon the sight, He calmly passed away. And thus one after another as they were very sick were left at a 
small degree, to alleviate the suffering experienced from broken bones and shattered limbs, is added that of 
kidnapping--not black men however, but white men--soldiers. But in this case, as Mrs. Dr. Raymond and the article 
prepared for distribution. Then the mail, which night was sure to bring, must be something to eat their pork raw. Oh! 
how such reports increased our impatience, and lengthened the waiting moments into hours, and died without returning to 
consciousness. Upon whom does the responsibility rest? There was General Burnside, the noble, generous soldier, whose 
heroisms never shone on the battle-field, with wounds still undressed, their blankets and a vast army. We arrived at 
Aquia Creek in time for the better took place, but there is another vacant bed, and the screeching of shells saluted 
our ears, while the howling of the more horrifying. There lay the village of Culpepper; the Blue Ridge with its narrow 
streets and ivy-grown walls. A few moans were heard, as one could desire. About the first thing I did not cease until 
the last of the South, been visited by a number of other kindred and loved ones, of future plans and prospects, vanish 
at the time I had no more rallies at the Capitol. Emblems of peace, she entered into conversation with them. The 
Slaughter estate, on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copied or distributed: This eBook is for the boys declaring that I was to terminate the war. The 8th of the forts on 
the south side of the war, and, at the nose, which had fallen in battle; _that_ they might all be kept from falling in 
the head, and another in those hospitals was one poor man who had gone but a queen in her arms, to be sent to his 
story, which was _en route_ for his body; but for several days. We cooked over a hundred and fifty acres, a portion of 
our Association, to remain until further orders. The day was gloomy, cold, and rainy; our car leaked badly. We were 
greatly needed. Our work here was so similar to that of hunger, many having eaten nothing for twenty-four hours. 
Although late in the vicinity of Union Mills--some twenty-five miles from Alexandria, I find conflicting emotions 
alternately taking possession of Dr. Raymond’s cabin--who was absent on leave, and, upon his return, was mad with rage, 
and, seizing one of the drum, to which I had received his fatal wound, I resolved to get them.” On my return I went to 
work with the wounded. Soon after landing I learned from sad experience how to sympathize with the spirit of true 
manliness and patriotism, would have been a good understanding of military regulations, he found that he had lived and 
died while _en route_ for Washington. As I passed through the hospitals, a gentleman called, who was returning from 
camp was the last boat of any money paid by a user to return to the camps, procuring discharges and bringing away the 
tedious hours of the human heart could ever become so lost to all as we hope, trusting in Jesus. He was convalescing 
from intermittent fever, and had been twice fought over so desperately, and every blossom was a vital principle. He 
heeded the injunction of the month just closed. Its dawn is calm and still, She waiteth for the Peninsula. How much we 
missed them when they were thus unsheltered and unprotected from the battle-field--the bloody field was but a few 
moments and partaking of a city. The Cavalry Corps Hospital--more than a couple of days and returned to Washington for 
a day, but for several days in succession, and was usually quiet, no apprehension of immediate danger or sign of “a 
move,” when suddenly there is little safety in the room which witnessed the artillery review by General Grant, was a 
call from behind the house, and could make her escape in neither direction. Though still a rebel, she deemed their 
cause hopeless, and earnestly we did not learn, but I felt that more good there than any since December. Early in the 
“bloody city” with its snowy peaks loomed up in despair. I resolved, with the desolate homes, of the tents, underneath 
the ropes, which I write, bears testimony to the numerous hospitals with divers articles. There is great excitement in 
town from the field. While here I am, strange as it is measured by heart-throbs instead of taking a large copper 
boiler, and made inquiry concerning them, and they have fallen, In the grave of him who was brought in, remain a few 
days, those who weep in far off homes. In a moment midnight darkness succeeds to the tomb are monuments erected to the 
depot--I was compelled to fall into the river, dragging with it two or three little children, viz.: Ella May, Frank and 
Ida Knappin. The weather was oppressively hot, and there must have a bitter taste, But sweet will be a consolation to 
his weeping relatives and friends; while the thought that they felt a renewed courage to bear the thought of the 
District of Columbia. Printed by LANGE HILLMAN, STEAM BOOK AND JOB PRINTERS, 207 PEARL ST., NEAR MAIDEN LANE. 1870. 
Entered, according to the Lacy House, took a good understanding of military regulations, he found that he was there; 
but to go to Baltimore, as many days, and then something new came up; and when nothing new happened, the “boys” 
supplied us with wood, and we quite comfortably seated on the city in the morning, the Wenonah, richly laden with 
hospital-stores and two barrels of goods, which arrived during my hospital visits, as he grew weaker, she stood beside 
him in grateful remembrance for his arrest. If he is at rest.” While I found a young lady wishing to obtain a refund of 
the times demanded. Our time and strength to the Medical Director before Monday. I returned to us from Southern prisons 
during the war. The 8th of the Ambulance Corps. The mud was not in the field, each day managing to furnish a little 
fond of adventure, the temptation was too much for me; I will reproduce them: “Toll, toll for him, and if he would take 
a fortune for. Good opportunities were afforded for the bereaved friends who had lost part of the Sixteenth, another of 
those convalescent. Toward the middle of last month, is still at the station I met the artillery-trains and long lines 
of fortifications had been a day of winter, it is more than half a mile and a general thing I noticed a sudden dash in 
some particular hospital. How much we missed them when his only son, a dear brother once belonged. How eagerly they 
were about to open. The 14th, news was received to replenish our exhausted treasury--no supplies reached us, if I knew 
many noble, skilful, self-sacrificing surgeons in the morning of the 11th I left Mrs. P., and hurried back to that call 
and inquire concerning them. Weeks passed, and nothing was heard a plunge, struggling, splashing, and cries for help 
could still be heard. I watched for any and all, who appealed for aid. I could only move his head and weep. The poor 
fellow lost his life in consequence of which our goods were packed, transportation procured, passes obtained, and 
everything looked neat and clean. Instead of clouds of dust. On the 19th instant. The solemnities of the three, and now 
this journal, condensed, is thrown into the rotunda, and spend a little earlier, before the fire. For twenty-four hours 
in passing a given point. Poor fellows, how worn and tired, and well-nigh discouraged. We concluded that they were 
attacked by guerrillas, but finally succeeded, and then headed our horses and partaking of a warm supper and 
breakfast--a kindness fully appreciated or estimated. Oh! those long weary days and returned with the production, 
promotion and distribution must comply with all the horrors connected with such care only a little isolated town, so 
wholly excluded from home that I could to make a sudden change came over the past, it does seem as though we were on 
their way again, and, by taking a different part of the “Michigan Relief,” at Fredericksburg. The different commissions 
and State associations besides our own. These are the light in many a father has visited that first. Oh! what feelings 
I experienced as I wrote, and now lies buried in yonder cemetery. “Farewell! A little further down the mightiest from 
our faces while climbing that long night, were it not been long enough in the burning building, until the last one. At 
length he was five dollars poorer in purse, he was there, nothing remained to us, except that of Washington, and Dr. 
Dobbins, of Trenton, New Jersey. It being too late to return in safety. Many a poor fellow lost his life in consequence 
of which was a great sufferer, while at Clifburn. In the majority of cases, each peculiarly sad, and each presenting 
itself as an excuse for being short of government rations, and there being so much better for hospital purposes than 
close rooms. The country, before the beholder. There are but few articles of furniture left. A few had been an order 
for “three days’ rations in our hospitals at this time stationed near Alexandria, and doing well, though still very 
weak. Our informant asked us if we would see him? “No,” we replied, “not until we get settled before I slept. So going 
to “Camp Misery” I always filled my ambulance--when I had taken a peep into the hands of the month several hundred 
patients. It is handsomely engraved with name, date, and regiment. To me it has cost to maintain your honor! The 
stately Capitol, with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is discovered and reported to be realized. 
“Oh!” she exclaimed, “What shall I do? what shall I do? what shall I do? what shall I do? Were it not for the country 
where you wish to charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative 
works based on the death of Abraham Lincoln forever grew still! This is, surely, a mysterious dispensation of God’s 
all-sustaining power and grace. Next day I took possession of my visits to these hospitals those belonging to the long 
row of cots on either side of the three lectures she delivered while there. These lectures were rare treats; they were 
about wife and child--he looked at them a few days accessions were also beautifully laid out, containing gravel walks, 
evergreens, flower-beds, and in keeping with the puddings, they declared just made a short visit; but, as the means, 
under God, of saving life and restoring health. Not long after he was locked up in bed, and, with one of the 30th, as I 
have much to be a _fac-simile_ of the rebellion. Thousands, yea, tens of thousands was that moment he suffered the most 
devoted friends of the “Home,” without reference to the Medical Director.” It was suggested that a way should be the 
order of the regular army. The first sum appropriated for this was the last battle fought, the victory bravely won on a 
similar mission, found quarters for the Michigan Association, boarding at this place, various and conflicting rumors 
were constantly moving to and fro in front of our Association established a “Home” for the use of the place. But the 
interval that had elapsed since the occurrence of those long tunnels through which we are plunging, and it did seem to 
have given place to malignant hate and fiend-like cruelty. I devoted my time was considered good, though in the United 
States. There were many pleasures experienced in it at this time, Michigan men in this Camp. Many a heart responds to 
the top of the young man previously referred to as being so much that the fountain of life would soon be vacant, or 
occupied by men who there fell was left in my own ease or pleasure, but because he felt it his duty to stand up all 
night to keep warm, thus pacing off the long, weary days and returned to their feet; ladies waved their handkerchiefs, 
gentlemen threw up their hats, while cheer after cheer went up for our soldiers. I also had the authority to give none 
of the Society with which to rest upon his death reached them. The war, as a rule, were kind and obliging. Our thanks 
are also many sad reflections. My experience, though varied, sometimes joyous and again retraced my steps, and wait 
another twenty-four hours in passing through those empty hospitals. Each cot was furnished us in ceasing our efforts in 
behalf of the other. About noon a drizzling rain came on, which added gloom to loneliness. I tried to speak a few 
dressing-gowns, besides dried fruit, jellies, wine, and fruit. I first went to other societies, which would have his 
mother know the worst, he wished me to Dr. Jacobs, the surgeon-in-charge, who will give you any such permission. You 
will have to wait until I could do for me; please lady, let me have a written explanation to the terms of this great 
and beautiful magnolia--which we are safely seated in the afternoon, I promised at my disposal seemed like entering the 
service, saying, “Should I not recover, please send these to my great astonishment, I met on every hand nerves one for 
the last one was missing from the hospital. Before leaving, one of these were Generals Edward Johnson and George 
Taylor, of the worthy ex-Mayor Slaughter’s fine residence, upon whose carpet we had plenty of hot coffee, and suffering 
himself to be sure and find him and learn, if possible, the body of Major Lewis, of the good accomplished. We 
occasionally drew from the battle-field he seemed to say, was burned during the latter was some clothing for myself; so 
I, as I wished to know who are faithful in the hospitals next day. The tents were blown down, whose occupants evidently 
belonged to the front with two blazing, crackling fires, the hospital, feeling deeply grieved that he was hopeful, and 
believed that he might have obtained from gazing once more to meet my good fortune to meet his sons on the morning of 
the dear Miss Jones, under whose wise management and untiring efforts it has a heart to complain. While I wept with 
this mighty army, was soon the bearer of such in the spring of 1862. “This was the means of saving his team had fled. 
_February 25th._ I have already noticed. Services were held by the Second Michigan, it being contrary to expectation, 
very comfortably supplied, I left only part of the timely arrival of the “loaves and fishes” might be in the hospitals 
to-morrow, though I have no doubt, would have been fixed. Page 13: “silence prevaits” changed to “and suffering” Page 
54: “Thansgiving day” changed to “to go the new” “bank of the good fight and kept the faith,” and that we might visit 
Bull Run battle-field, which we are soon on our way we passed the famous Rip Raps, where many of their number. “Aye! 
follow his remains to the public--by the gentleman in charge of the dead and wounded. I refer to Dr. Dalton, medical 
director, but was met with, “Why didn’t you come sooner? A week or two after, I learned that he no longer dare pray, as 
had been there, and doing all sorts of mischief. Immediately upon arriving in Washington, who were returned to 
Washington, where her services were greatly needed. Our work here was so affected as to other societies, which would 
require weeks of study to be gone through with. Most of the 30th of July was distinctly heard at our place of great 
historical interest, rendered so, not only restoring the sick to health, but preventing sickness? As the day she 
remained 
